Chapter Eight
THE REST OF ANNA'S JOURNEY

Beginning Specialized Selective Mutism Treatment ("Intensive Treatment")

Over the summer before Anna started Kindergarten and in the early fall, I began to put more thought and study into selective mutism. During my research I came across information about "intensive treatment." I learned that intensive treatment allows children with SM to participate in an extended and concentrated dose of exposure therapy and that there are various "centers for excellence" around the country where clinicians work with children regularly. We zeroed in on a program that we thought would be a good fit. In October, we packed our van for a family road trip hoping, at the very least, to find some answers and praying for a minor miracle. We did not find the miracle for which we had hoped. It was discouraging to learn that a program which helps so many was not able to help our family. If the experts couldn't help us, we wondered who could? For many children and families, these programs are life changing but when we returned home, we discovered that Anna had regressed in some ways. She seemed even more anxious about certain situations and began to withhold speech from us in the community.

We gently reminded Anna that she does, in fact, speak with us in public and we would like for her to practice doing so. The next day, we had fun rewarding her with a check mark for each time she spoke with us at a restaurant. She earned several (easy) checks and got to pick a prize. After we had Anna somewhat back to "baseline," we let her know that we planned to continue working with her to use her voice. We assured her that we would go more slowly and hopefully it would feel easier. After that conversation, Andrew and I needed to be BRAVE when we tried to practice ordering ice cream (especially when Anna fell to the floor and had a massive tantrum because we suggested that she try and say "vanilla"). It was obvious that no reward would help her over the hump of ordering by herself. We didn't want to do any more "damage" so we stopped practicing while we began to think about our plans going forward.

Fortunately, I was already scheduled to attend the Selective Mutism Association's annual conference. It was an opportunity to learn more about SM, meet the leading professionals treating SM, and help determine next steps for Anna. I had so many questions and I was determined to speak with as many experts as I possibly could. By the end of the conference, I had picked up important insight and ideas that helped us to formulate a plan for Anna.

get



It became clear that we were going to need a knowledgeable guide, an expert in treating SM, to coach our team back home through the steps necessary to Anna speaking. Ultimately, I researched several options and we decided to begin conversations with Dr. Kotrba in Michigan and Dr. Fernald, a speech language pathologist in Florida. Dr. Fernald happens to be located near my parent's home and she was able to fit us in for a consultation during a visit.

up

Dr. Fernald follows the DIR/Floortime® model which integrates social emotional development, individual differences (sensory processing, speech/ language skills, visual spatial skills, and motor planning) and building relationships as part of an interdisciplinary framework for intervention. It involves following the child's lead and engaging the child on their level, while moving the child o the developmental ladder. We arrived to find an "indoor playground" similar to the OT clinic that Anna was accustomed to attending every week. She was very much at home on the therapy equipment (swing, trampoline, and toys) and she quickly jumped right into playing and having a good time. Once ready, Dr. Fernald had Anna stand inside of a small tent and wait to receive a big exercise ball that was being rolled into the tent. Dr. Fernald was focused on helping Anna initiate communication. She told Anna to click her tongue when she was ready for Dr. Fernald to roll the ball into the tent. The brilliance of that particular activity was that Anna was shielded from view and perhaps she felt a little more confident in using her voice by reducing visual stimuli. Dr. Fernald had progressed Anna in a short time to making sounds which are then shaped into words.

Later, we connected with Dr. Kotrba by phone to learn more about her treatment methodology. We spoke at length about Anna's history and about our desire to move things along slowly. We explained that we needed an expert on our team to help establish a plan for Anna as well as provide on-going support and guidance. We ended the call with a great feeling about Dr. Kotrba's behavioral treatment approach.

In January, Anna, Nana, and I began our drive to Michigan to meet with Dr. Kotrba. We told Anna that just like there are a lot of children that are challenged with talking, there are a lot of doctors that help those children. We told her that every doctor is different, just like every little girl and boy is different, and that we would try and have more fun with this doctor. Our approach from the very beginning of this trip was entirely different than our first trip.

When we arrived at the hotel in Michigan, we were thrilled to find a fantastic indoor pool. After we settled in, I told Anna that we could go swimming. The water was cold and I really did NOT want to go in. It would require me to be super brave because I HATE cold water (a fact that Anna knows well). I told her that we could swim every day and that I'd do something brave if she tried to be brave with Dr. K. every day. Anna said that to be really brave, I would need to jump into the deep end and scream "poopy face." I was happy to oblige, with the understanding that this was a quid pro quo agreement (and we were the only people in the pool). This went on for a while; she had me jumping into the pool every which way and saying all kinds of crazy stuff. She loved it!

Determined to find success and carve out a path forward for Anna, I put a lot of thought into the small details. We brought beanie boos (stuffed animals) to play with, a Lego friend's house to build, stickers and we also brought ShopkinsTM. ShopkinsTM are tiny, tiny collectible plastic figures based on grocery store items. I had avoided caving to this trendy collectible but Anna wanted them (she wanted them badly). Knowing that rewards, if used correctly, can be game changing for children with SM, I gave in and ordered several packages of ShopkinsTM, resigning myself to the inevitably of finding these tiny figures all over my house (for years to come).

While we drove to Dr. Kotrba's office for the first day of intensive treatment, I tried to keep the mood in the car light and airy. I reminded Anna that I was brave in the pool and that I bet she could be brave today. If she was brave, I would also be brave in the pool later in the day. I verbally reenacted the pool scene from the day before including all of the wild words she made me say. With each utterance of each wacky word, she relaxed and laughed all over again! The mood was set and it was silly!

Due to an unexpected emergency, Dr. Kotrba's colleague, Katelyn Reed, stepped in for the first day of intensive therapy. I was a little anxious about starting the first day without Dr. K., but as it turned out I had nothing to be worried about. Only minutes after we arrived, it was clear that Katelyn knew what she was doing. Katelyn was very relaxed and natural, she had a great calmness about her. She clearly understood the nuances of working with children with SM. Anna had severe separation anxiety and it would have felt traumatic for her (and therefore she would not have spoken) if I left the room, so I remained with her for the duration. While Anna would not respond verbally to Katelyn at first, she was willing to play a game with us. She shook her head yes or no, and by the end of the first day, she was making sounds with Katelyn. Her sticker sheet was almost full, she felt successful, and she was able to select several ShopkinsTM as rewards. Anna was tired but she was still excited for our evening swim and she was still willing to play the "brave" game.

The next day, we met with Dr. K. and I was so relieved that she was able to pick up where Katelyn left off. Of course, she is also a natural working with children who are learning bravery and overcoming SM. Dr. K is truly an expert, blending many of the latest research-based techniques for SM. She was calm and reassuring while progressing Anna toward speech through shaping (tool #4). One of the first things that she did was to work with Anna on blowing air through her lips. They do a fantastic exercise with cotton balls where they literally race them on a table by blowing air with their mouths. For children who are struggling and can't seem to speak at all, even blowing air can be challenging. However, for many children, it is attainable and it can be a "gateway" as it was for Anna. She progressed to beginning sounds and then we worked on first sounds, end sounds, and then combining them to make "yes" and "no." For the rest of the second day, and the next day, we also worked on stimulus fading (tool #3) with other staff members. They were experts at fading into our games and activities and they helped Anna to hone her ability to produce short answers when prompted. At times it was slow and tedious, but we were finding success by the third day in the form of simple responses to easy questions.



HELPFUL HANDOUT

New Brave Talking Partners 
Anna used this handout to track her successes in talking to new peers; as we filled in the circles she felt increasingly accomplished!


After Intensive Therapy
Intensive therapy is just the beginning. It is NOT magic for most kids. And it wasn't magic for Anna. While for some kids it does seem to work to move them past their fear of speaking very quickly, for MOST kids it is more of a springboard toward reaching their goals. Intensive therapy is a time of learning for all involved. Caregivers learn how to work with their children when they return home. Teachers (usually by video or phone conference) are given instructions on how to modify their interactions with the child. Even the clinician will be taking notes and jotting down ideas to identify the best way to assist the family back home. Adults must be supportive and determined to "generalize" the gains after intensive treatment (by practicing the skills frequently with new people, in new locations, and with new demands). It is also important to find someone locally to guide your team and/or to stay in touch with the clinician who conducted the intensive intervention (by phone if necessary) to help with continued progress.

Community Exposure

Practice makes proficient when it comes to SM. I felt compelled to keep Anna and myself on track and to make sure that we were accountable for our practice. Most people who know me would probably think that I'm organized but I never, ever, FEEL organized. When I begin something new, I usually have a strong NEED to feel organized. Community exposure, for Anna, was no exception and so I channeled my years of experience with PowerPoint and Excel as a management consultant. I enjoyed creating helpful charts and worksheets to motivate Anna and assist us in reaching our goals. I began creating worksheets for the situation at hand and our first worksheet helped guide us toward adding new speaking partners. The example provided on the next page is Anna's completed worksheet with her artwork.

I told Anna that when we added ten new speaking partners she would get a big prize - a fun day around town to celebrate! Because Anna loves art, I thought it would be fun for her to draw each new partner out of the circles on the worksheet page. We started with my friend Lisa. Anna didn't know Lisa well but Lisa knew all about Anna and she was prepared for our afternoon. She was a sympathetic, patient and "safe" person.


We started with cotton ball races and then moved on to sounds, using shaping techniques (tool #4). Anna eventually answered questions, but never moved into a more natural speaking flow with Lisa despite a couple of more meetings. After Lisa, we had a new babysitter and Anna didn't want to use the shaping steps with her. She told me that she could talk to Mary without the shaping steps. Sure enough, Anna did it! After Mary, we were able to add several more talking partners slowly throughout the spring.

In addition to “new” adults in our home, we began working right away on community members – shopkeepers, restaurant waitstaff, library workers, etc. We started with first sounds and we worked our way up to asking pre-determined questions. We did not use polite words or greetings like "excuse me”, “hi”. "please" or "thank you". Those were too hard for Anna. I started the interaction by introducing Anna and then I would say, "We are working on brave talking today, would you mind if we ask you a few questions?". In the year that we were doing this type of practice, I only had one person say no! We had a few that didn't seem to have patience but honestly most people were so happy to help and even thought that what we were doing was fantastic. I never went into detail about SM, just that we were working on being brave and talking with new people. In addition to speaking goals, we had goals such as eye contact and "giving and taking." Anna had to practice giving money to cashiers and taking items such as the cookie or ice cream that she ordered directly from the server. Kids with SM tend to have difficulty with these types of exchanges, even if they don't require speech, and so it is important to give them opportunities to practice. Giving movie tickets to usher, grabbing the bag from the store cashier, and handing over money to pay for the items are all good options for practice. 

To keep Anna motivated, almost every outing ended with ice cream that she had to order (in whichever way she was currently able). In the beginning, it was with first sounds. Anna would say, "I" for ice cream. That was it! With our new and slower mindset, we were able to avoid meltdowns on the floor of the ice cream parlor. Saying "I", in a whisper, was achievable for Anna and we slowly progressed to more sounds and finally to simply saying "ice cream. " Because
the toy store was right next to the ice cream parlor, many days we made our way over there too. At the time, Anna was highly motivated to add to her Beanie BooTM stuffed animal collection and so we capitalized on her enthusiasm. The manager of the toy store was especially amazing with Anna. She learned how to communicate with Anna by limiting speaking demands in the beginning and then eventually asking "forced-choice" questions (providing the answer choices as part  of the question such as, “Do you want the purple Beanie Boo or the pink one?").


During the late spring, approximately six months after the intensive in Michigan, we had a week of major accomplishments! Of all places, it started with the dentist even though Anna had a history of "over-reacting" during dental appointments. Prior to the cleaning, Anna and I decided that she would try and be brave and answer questions from the hygienist. The hygienist spoke to Anna with no expectation and then as time went by, she peppered in a few questions. When this happened, I tried to slow things down to give Anna time to speak. If needed, I repeated the question, queuing Anna that an answer was expected. Anna answered with a whisper! After the appointment, the hygienist enthusiastically but privately noted Anna's progress!

The next day, I took Anna to an art festival. When we arrived, Anna made a beeline for the face painter. As we waited in line, I told her that she should tell the painter what she wanted. We practiced a few times and despite some hesitation, Anna did it! She asked in a soft whisper to get a butterfly painted on her arm! We started to make great progress when Anna's friends began to join us for our adventures. We really stepped up our game, bringing along a clipboard with surveys and games that involved speaking with mall patrons and workers (see worksheets in chapter 7). The clipboard was an excellent prop! The kids passed the clipboard back and forth and took turns filling in the worksheets. They felt official! We progressed to including more socially appropriate language including "hi", "please" and "thank you." "Excuse me" was the hardest for Anna but eventually she was able to do it. Having her friends along made her braver and she was able to model some of their more natural speaking patterns!

Anna still struggled with "pop-up people." As we discussed in the previous chapter, when people appear or pop up out of nowhere and start asking questions (with no time for preparation) children can find it difficult to respond. I coined the term "pop-up people" because Anna's reaction was always to freeze, as if she was stunned by a "jack in the box" toy when the top pops open! From the overly friendly person at the store who wants to inquire about age, grade, or her favorite princess, to the check-out person who asks about her hair and probes for her Preparing for name, to the mom at the park who is interested in which school she attends, pop- Pop-Up People up people were lurking everywhere! We needed to intentionally focus on these situations, so I created a series of worksheets (see chapter 7) and we went to work. Advanced preparation and practice helped Anna to finally conquer these types of encounters. In the moment, if it was needed, I would repeat the question and that allowed Anna to feel as though she was answering me. It also gave her extra time to think through her answer.


HELPFUL HANDOUT
Preparing for Pop-Up People and Pop-Up People Challenge Worksheets
Available at the end of Chapter 7.

HELPFUL HANDOT
Full Voice Fish Bowl Challenge 
This worksheet can provide ideas for slow practices to encourage full voice verbalizations in the community setting or encourage progress toward another goal.


Beyond the Whisper

No matter how comfortable Anna was becoming with answering and asking questions, it was always in a whisper. We needed to make a concerted effort to move her into her full voice. As always, we discussed it and we decided it was time to work on voice volume. At the time, Anna was very excited about getting a pet fish. We came up with a special worksheet called the "Full Voice Fish Bowl Challenge" like the one seen here. When Anna successfully used her FULL voice ten times, she would earn a fish. For Anna the key has always been setting a goal, deciding on an appropriate and motivating reward, practicing, and then executing. The reward needed to feel immediately tangible at the very beginning of a new challenge. Having a friend along was also very motivating for Anna and increased our odds of success. Even though Anna didn't get a fish on our first visit to the pet store, she was able to pick out a fish bowl and the rock. The next time we went, she picked up the sea plant and statue, and then finally on the third time, she got a lovely Beta fish that she named "Starfire Lizzy."


When working with your child to move from a whisper to a fuller voice, the following phrases might help: "Say it a little louder.", "I don't think they could hear you.", "Could you hear her?", "What was that, Jack?"



New Brave Talking Partners Example 
Instructions: Each circle represents a new speaking partner. Write the name and color in the circle to the person you spoke with!

The fearless are merely fearless.

People who ACT in spite of their fear are TRULY BRAVE!






“Full Voice” Fish Bol Challenge

Instructions: Use the spaces below to document each instance of brave work and then place a check near one fishbowl item. This challenge works well at the pet store or anywhere in the community at large. Prizes might be the tangible items listed below and earned right away or at the end of the challenge.

1

2

3

Brave Work Practice

8/17/18: At Pet store, used full voice for first syllable "W

8/20/18: Used full voice for the first syllable "W"

8/23/18: Used full voice for the first first word "Where"
8/27/18: Used full voice for the first first word "Where"
8/30/18: At pet store, used full voice for the first two words "Where is"
9/4/18: Used full voice for the first two words "Where is"


9/10/18: At Pet store, used full voice for first three words "Where is the" 

8

9/13/18: Used full voice for the first three words "Where is the" 

9

9/18/18: At pet store, used full voice for entire sentence, "Where is the fish food?"

10

9/18/18: Used full voice for entire sentence, "Where is the fish net?" 

11

9/18/18: Used full voice for entire sentence, "Where are the fish bowls?"

12

9/18/18: Used full voice for entire sentence, "Where is the restroom?"


Fish Bowl
Rock
Plant #1
Plant #2
Plant #3

Statue #1
Statue #2
Fish Food
✔Fish Net
FISH!!!!




We approached speaking in a full voice a lot like we first approached speaking (in what turned out to be a whisper) in the beginning. Anna would need taking into using her more confident voice. She simply wasn't going to begin speaking in a full voice if we didn't break down the steps. Anna was to begin, with one sound or word, in a full voice and then her friend Jordan could jump in and they could ask the rest of the question together. Anna might say, "H" in a full voice and then Jordan and Anna would finish the rest of the sentence together with, "ow old is your dog?" We slowly ramped up to one word in a full voice alone and then more than one word. We often had to remind Anna to raise her voice volume.



PARENT POINTER
Beginning to speak in a "contaminated environment" is one of the most difficult situations for a child with SM to overcome. "Contamination" can be so challenging that even after intensive treatment or consistent weekly therapy, with improvements made outside of the school setting, silence can still exist within the walls of the school. Anecdotally, many parents have reported that moving to a new school can be helpful. It gives the child a fresh start where they are no longer known as "the kid who does not talk." Of course, depending on the child's age and maturity level, you may wish to include them in the decision-making process.

HELPFUL HANDOUT
Success with Important Adults Available at the end of Chapter 7. 

Contaminated Environments and People

One of our most difficult tasks was helping Anna to speak with “contaminated" adults. Neighbors, teachers, coaches, and other adults with whom Anna had a history of not speaking required a special plan. Our first step was to remind Anna that we noticed she seemed to have difficulty with some people more than others. Eventually we created a list of neighbors and other contaminated people that we would work through one-by-one. This required some preparation on my part, as I had to contact each person, plan a get-together and coach them on how to increase our chances of success. A large part of the "coaching" involved passing along information on child directed and verbal directed interaction (tools #1 and #2) and using forced choice questions. Essentially, I was asking our friends NOT to ask questions in the beginning, be relaxed (and silly if possible), use forced- choice questions, allow extra time for an answer, repeat the question if needed, and not to react or make a big deal when she speaks.

Our first get together was with our neighbors, Gerry and Mark. Jordan, their daughter, and Anna played together often and Anna was frequently at their house but was in the habit of shaking her head to answer or whispering her answers to Jordan. We planned a game night to include games that I knew would encourage speech. Our games were home-made and we used them quite frequently at school as well. The great thing about these games is that kids love them and each turn requires speech! When Anna and I brought our games across the street, everyone knew what to do! Anna knew that she was going to use her voice with Gerry and Mark. I would be guiding the activities and Gerry and Mark were reminded to follow the "ground rules." Most importantly, we had fun.

"Question" JengaTM was the first game we played and requires that each JengaTM block contain a question (handwritten, in advance). When a block is pulled out from the JengaTM tower, there are several options for incorporating speech. During our game, I was the designated question reader for Anna's first several turns. I asked the questions and she answered. For the later rounds, Gerry was the question reader and Anna answered! We played several more rounds and Mark also had a turn as the question reader. Success!

Our next "game" was modified from occupational therapy and involves using a set of kid friendly "tweezers" to find small animals hidden in a box of dry beans. Kids of all ages (and adults too) LOVE the hidden animals game! There must be something about the surprise and novelty of digging through dry beans various ways to incorporate speech. We decided that Jordan and Anna would take with tweezers and discovering a hidden creature. Again, this game can be played about the animal that was uncovered. When Anna "unearthed" a shark, we s digging for animals and that the parents, would take turns asking questionstook turns asking basic questions such as, "Where does a shark live?". Anna was completely verbal during the hidden animals game.

After the smashing success of game night, Anna was "primed" for speech hut Gerry still had to use some advanced skills to solidify speech with Anna. I  remember Gerry telling me how hard it was and that she really had to "insist" on speech in some cases. She used a lot of forced choice questions and eventually Anna became completely natural in her speech with Gerry and Mark! One by one, we worked through our list of other contaminated people and places. 


PARENT POINTER
It is helpful to let friends, neighbors, teachers, extended family, etc.  know that they may feel uncomfortable when they are using speech promoting tools such as verbal directed interaction with forced choice questions.

It may feel as if they are "insisting" on speech and it may feel odd and “pushy.” It is natural to feel uncomfortable during the process. In fact, it's to be expected. Remember to go slow and allow for extra time! Please note that we are not advocating for an aggressive or forceful encounter but rather an assertive encounter, one that allows the child extra time to answer and communicates (without words) that an answer is expected.

School Work

For many children with SM (Anna included), school is the MOST contaminated and the most difficult environment to move from silence to speech. Teachers and staff in the educational setting are essential to the success of children working to overcome SM and I am so grateful to all of Anna's teachers who went above and beyond!

Anna returned to school in mid-January, after attending Dr. Kotrba's intensive therapy in Michigan, with a new plan. We needed to systematically expose Anna to speaking at school. At the beginning, it was important that we planned exposures outside of her classroom, but still in the school. By the middle of the school year, her history of not speaking in the classroom meant that we were likely to have better success in a different setting. The resource room was available and we started there one day a week. On those days, we did not do community exposures. We worked on brave talking in the community and in the school simultaneously, but we did so in a way that would not overwhelm Anna.


For the first school exposure, post-intensive, we chose to keep things simple. We met with Mrs. Morris (Anna's Kindergarten teacher) in the resource room progress toward speech with Mrs. Morris. Anna has always accomplished more and we had a classmate join us. Our goal was to help Anna make any form of got stickers, checkmarks, and a small prize for their efforts - I didn't want Anna with friends along for support so I brought games that were fun for all and everyone to feel singled out or as if she was being treated differently and I didn't want her friends to feel as if they were being left out. Mrs. Morris helped to select the student that would join us each week. I brought several game options in case my first choice didn't work. We needed to string together several positive outcomes in order to get Anna comfortable speaking at school.

Through stimulus fading practices (tool #3), Anna was able to speak in a whisper directly to Mrs. Morris in the resource room. As she became more natural with her speech in the resource room, we changed our meeting location to a corner of the classroom. We still invited a friend to help and we still played games. The only factor that changed was the environment. Success! At long last, near the end of the school year Anna finally spoke to Mrs. Morris in her classroom!
PARENT POINTER

While some children are able to speak in a single session of stimulus fading, other children may require several sessions of stimulus fading before they are able to speak. Remember that each child will move at their own pace.


Anna Speaking with Her Teacher at School, in the Classroom 
Challenge Pathway Example
4
Speaking to the teacher in the classroom with planned practice - teacher only asks questions that Anna is prepared to answer, teacher 4 leads (several weeks)
3
Speaking with the teacher in a corner of the classroom continue stimulus fading, only changing the environment to the corner of class- room (the audience and the speech demand remained consistent), mom leads (two weeks)

2
Speaking naturally to the teacher in a resource room - play games with teacher and a friend using stimulus fading techniques (tool #4) three times per week, mom leads (several weeks)
1
Working toward speech with the teacher in a resource room - play games with teacher and friend using shaping techniques (tool #4) once per week, mom leads (time frame: several weeks)

Moving to Montessori for First Grade

-

We are fortunate that our school district has a public Montessori option (1st - 8th grade). After discussing the pros and cons of Montessori education with Dr. Kotrba, I scheduled a meeting with the principal. Jody Swanigan (Ms. Jody) took a profound interest in understanding Anna's special needs, answering my questions and helping to craft a plan for Anna's transition to Montessori. Because Ms. Jody has a daughter the same age as Anna, she offered to meet us for playdates so Anna would get to know her outside of the school environment. Anna was just beginning to speak with a few new adults so Ms. Jody and I worked in tandem with verbal directed interaction (tool #2) to elicit speech. Many times, I repeated  Ms. Jody's questions and Anna directed the answer to me. 
The guidance and preparation offered by Ms. Jody and the staff helped to kick off Anna's first grade school year moving in a positive direction. 


Montessori after-school art class: At our very first meeting in the spring before Anna started at Montessori, Ms. Jody suggested that we register Anna for an after-school art class that was about to begin and run talk with me before the first day and we reviewed information about SM through the end of the school year. Ms. Eliza, the art teacher, agreed to and what Ms. Eliza could do to help. I also asked if I could attend the class with Anna. For the first time, Anna was verbal in a classroom from the beginning! Ms. Eliza used forced choice questions and Anna answered them in a whisper. If Anna needed additional supplies, I coached her on what to say to Ms. Eliza. We created a school environment where speech was expected and established prior to school starting!

Visitation day: At the end of the school year, new students are invited to spend a morning with the lower elementary teachers (even if they don't currently attend Montessori). Ms. Jody casually suggested that we may wish for Anna to skip this event. She felt like it might be too chaotic for Anna. I was reluctant for Anna to miss the event but I knew that it would be impossible to effectively manage the morning to ensure that we were not “contaminating" the new school or any of the teachers. 

Montessori Institute: During the summer, new students attend "Montessori Institute," a chance for them to learn about the school and get comfortable with the differences they might expect at Montessori. Ms. Jody set us up to meet with the institute teachers early in the summer and Anna had a chance to play games and approach speaking with them reviewing the handouts about SM we provide in this book and I left them in a way that felt comfortable before Institute week. I prepared them by with additional information about Anna. Institute week went well - Anna spoke with the new teachers in a whisper!

The quiet entrance: Ms. Jody mentioned that part of the Montessori philosophy is a celebration of the first day of school and so, on the first day, the teachers and staff get loud and silly and greet students rather wildly on their way into the school. She assumed that this probably wouldn't be option for Anna but she extended that option to any other student that optimal for Anna. In fact, not only did she provide a "quiet entrance" might feel more comfortable with a less boisterous start to school.

Meeting Anna's 1st grade teachers: We arranged two meetings with her new teachers, Ms. Virginia and Ms. Ali, during the week before school started. The first meeting went well; we played games and Anna spoke in a whisper with both teachers. During the second meeting, remarkably, Anna gave a book report! Students at the Montessori are expected to read a book over the summer and bring in props to help them discuss the book with their classmates. The chances of Anna being able to accomplish this task within the first few days of school were slim, but I didn't want Anna to be excused from the assignment. She read an American Girl Doll book and we brought some of the items that came with the book to help with the discussion. Anna was excited to share and she did amazingly well. She spoke (in a whisper) about the book and answered questions. What progress from only a year prior!

Knowing potential pitfalls is so important and I am truly grateful to Ms. Jody for so masterfully guiding us into a wonderful start of the year and setting us on a positive (verbal) course. Even with momentum on our side, Anna spent most of 1st grade whispering with her teachers. When they asked her to speak up or prompted her for a louder voice, they reported that she appeared as if she would cry. They feared a setback if they pushed her and we decided to let her get comfortable speaking with them first before pushing for a louder, fuller voice. Although Anna was verbal with some of her specials teachers, she was not able to speak with most other teachers and parent volunteers just yet.

Eventually, we needed to work on being brave and raising her voice volume so that her teachers could better hear her. After winter break, we decided to put some concerted effort into moving Anna beyond the whisper. Much like before with her kindergarten teacher, we started outside of the classroom with games, rewards, and gentle expectation. It worked again this time and, after several weeks of work, Anna was speaking in a full voice with Mrs. Virginia and Mrs. Ali. In addition to our work with her classroom teachers, we also began to do school- wide "surveys" and "scavenger hunts" with many of the teachers and staff so that she was practicing using her full voice at school more often. It wasn't long before she began speaking in a full voice to most staff members.

First grade ended with tremendous growth for Anna. She participated in a stage performance with other students where she whispered two lines (and laughed and smiled) while performing dance numbers. She also dressed up as Princess Diana and delivered lines telling onlookers about her character at "wax museum" day (louder than a whisper but quieter than a full voice!). At the very end of the year, she had to create a biome project and answer questions about the animal she selected. She became quite an expert on the seahorse and although she wanted me by her side, she nervously answered questions as other parents made their way around the room. It was an exciting year! 

Where We Are Today
Anna is a happy and confident 2nd grader. She worked so hard to overcome SM and she is a confident speaker in almost every situation. Anna helps other children practice "brave talking" when she can and she is so proud that she can help. Anna often chooses to speak in situations even if they do not require speech - she will volunteer information and even advocate for herself at times. Our goal is for Anna to become even more comfortable and confident at school and to accomplish confident conversation whenever she wishes. Anna bravely participated in wax museum day, science night, and performed a song and dance with friends in her school talent show this year all while using a nice full and brave voice! We are almost at the end of our journey with SM and we could not be more proud of Anna for her bravery and courage in overcoming this very unique challenge.

I "interviewed" Anna recently with the intention of helping her to write a short story about her journey with "brave talking." Together, Anna and I used that conversation to weave together her thoughts on moving past silence.

In her words...
My name is Anna and when I was little, it was very hard and scary to talk. I didn't trust people. I felt embarrassed and worried; sometimes at school I felt like screaming and running away, but I never did. There was one kid who said mean things to me, but I couldn't tell anyone, and it made me feel mad.

The biggest thing that I learned about "brave talking" is that I will feel scared but I still have to get through it. I had to learn to be brave with a lot of things, not just talking. We practiced bravery with trying new foods, school drop off, walking in the hallways at school by myself, and trying new things. I learned to push through my scared feelings, let it happen and then I would feel better.

Now, I don't have trouble talking to people. I don't feel scared anymore but sometimes I still have trouble telling people how I feel. When I meet new people, I don't feel scared anymore! I am not shy at all and I'm kind of outgoing. If you are a kid reading this, I bet you need help brave talking too! Don't be embarrassed or worried at all. I was just like you and I have met other kids just like us. They are brave too! You can do it!!! Just remember - it won't always feel so scary.

I want to give some "shout-outs" to some people who helped me:

My Mom-She helped me so much and I always felt warm and cozy and relaxed when my mom would help me. (Mom here - I SWEAR she said this!)
Emilie and Daddy - They made me laugh and supported me every second of the way. 
Dr. Kotrba, Katelyn Reed, and the Thriving Minds Team - I am so happy that they knew how to help me and understood me!
My teachers and my school - I LOVE my school(s) so much and everyone there really helped me because they were very patient with me.
All my family and friends but especially Nana, Summer, Jordan, and Otto - They helped me with brave talking practice at the mall a lot and they also helped me to get my mind off brave talking sometimes.

Bye, Chow, Shalom, Ta ta, Adios,

Anna, age 8
