Chapter Four
SETTING THE FOUNDATION FOR AN EFFECTIVE INTERVENTION

Building the foundation for an effective intervention and ultimately claiming victory over 
selective mutism will take on different forms for different families. In the previous chapter, we provided a high-level, "bird's eye view" of the journey to overcome SM with the Field Map. It's time to dive a little deeper into each of the components presented on the map. In this chapter we focus on the Foundational Foothills, Mount Mindful, and Victory Valley.

A Strong Foundation will Often Include:

A guide (usually a therapist) to help you better navigate new and challenging pathways. They will help lessen the difficulty of the journey and they may even uncover a few shortcuts! 
Being prepared is also vital. You must prepare yourself, your child, your family and other team members for the intervention process (the journey!). Perhaps the most important aspect of preparation is building an understanding of SM and establishing the importance of working toward bravery with speaking.

If you believe that your child may struggle with some or all the criteria of SM, it is recommended that an official diagnosis be made. A formal diagnosis can open the door to effective treatment, interventions and accommodations in the school setting, and a better overall understanding of the child, as well as set the foundation for your intervention "team."

Finding a Knowledgeable Guide

Many parents find it helpful to consult first with their child's pediatrician about their concerns and to rule out developmental delays or physical issues. Some physicians are not familiar with selective mutism; it may be helpful to bring information about SM to the appointment. After consulting with the pediatrician, parents are encouraged to find a treating professional who can provide diagnosis and treatment. Helpful treating professionals may include: 

Child Psychologist - a doctoral-level mental health professional. In the context of SM, they work to address anxiety and related issues, and preferably have several years of experience treating children with behavioral or cognitive- behavioral therapy. 
Psychologists understand how to incorporate both emotional and behavioral components into their treatment protocol. They can be helpful in diagnosing SM, conducting brave practices (exposures), consulting with the school, and training/supporting parents.

Psychiatrist a physician with a specialty in mental health diagnosis and medical intervention, including prescribing medication for anxiety. They can be helpful in diagnosing SM and considering medical intervention. They are especially important if parents are concerned about medication due to co-existing medical issues (e.g., diabetes) or if there are multiple medications prescribed. 
Psychotherapist/Counselor - a masters-level mental health professional, with similarities in training to psychologists. Counselors may also be helpful in diagnosing SM, using behavioral treatment, consulting with the school, and training/supporting parents with intervention.

Speech-Language Pathologist (SLP) - a professional who has training and experience in evaluating and treating children who have speech and language weaknesses. They may be helpful in targeting specific speech/language weaknesses and treating children with co-occurring speech issues, and may also be an important interventionist for increasing speech through brave practices. 

Occupational Therapist (OT) - a professional who helps children to do things that are important and meaningful tasks of daily living such as eating, dressing, school activities, and work. They may work with the child on scaffolding (moving children slowly through difficult tasks), becoming comfortable with discomfort via motor and experiential activities, and addressing additional challenges including processing and sensory issues.

Many factors go into the final decision of selecting an appropriate therapist including physician referral, insurance, cost of treatment, and distance from home. When trying to determine which treating professional will be the best fit for your child, don't be afraid to call them and ask questions about their background and experience with SM and childhood anxiety. In addition to having clinical knowledge, the therapist must be able to build rapport with your child. As a parent, you will also want to feel comfortable with the therapist and feel as though the therapist values you as an essential part of your child's SM journey.

Parent Pointer 
Overview of Selective Mutism for Therapists, Doctors, Teachers, and Others 
This handout provides an overview of SM for those who may have limited knowledge of the diagnosis.

PARENT POINTER

In this book, when we reference therapists, we are generally speaking of psychologists, counselors, psychotherapists, speech- language pathologists, and occupational therapists; psychiatrists typically do not provide intervention outside of medical treatment.

PARENT PointER

Even with all your hard work and determination to find a qualified therapist, you may come up short. Parents, speech-language pathologists, occupational therapists, school counselors, social workers or other professionals who are willing to educate themselves can support and assist with an intervention plan.

Finding your guide
How to find the right treating professional.

What are the qualities of an ideal guide?











When seeking a therapist, parents might ask the following questions:

1. How many children with selective mutism have you treated?

2. What treatment strategies do you use for kids with SM? (answer should include practices/exposures)

3. Are you able to provide exposure experiences outside of the office setting?

4. How do you involve the parent and school in your intervention?

5. What do you do if the child doesn't talk to you in the first few sessions? (answer should include a specific plan for eliciting speech as opposed to allowing the child to start speaking when they are ready or providing a referral to a different treatment source)

PARENT POINTER

There are many excellent and capable providers who are simply unable to leave their office setting for school meetings and community practice due to legal and regulatory reasons. Some of the best therapists can be handcuffed by limitations but in most cases find creative ways
to continue to support, train and guide parents nevertheless. Expert treating professionals can successfully guide their patients in spite of these constraints.

What if you can't find an ideal provider in your area?


Many parents may find that they are unable to find all of these qualities in provider in their area. While it might be best to work with a professional who has experience with successfully treating children with SM, another option is to look for therapists who are trained in behavioral therapy and work regularly with children with anxiety. These therapists might be able and willing to obtain more training specifically in selective mutism, allowing them to modify their approach to treat your child. It's important that the therapist is willing, if necessary, to consult with an SM expert in the event that progress stalls.

Some families choose to travel to see a clinician experienced in SM due to a lack of availability of quality therapeutic support locally or because their child presents with a particularly challenging case of SM. By traveling to an expert, the child can see a therapist with years of experience treating SM, and in most cases the expert will consult with the school and family throughout treatment. Within the SM community, traveling to an expert for an evaluation and a "concentrated- dose" of behavioral treatment is often referred to as an "intensive intervention."

Intensive Intervention for SM

When psychologists are treating any type of specific anxiety or phobia, the "special sauce" for the intervention is consistent and repeated exposure to that fear. Without consistent and repeated exposure, children will take much longer (or may never be able to) feel comfortable in anxiety-provoking situations (i.e., desensitization). For several years, practitioners have been using more "concentrated-dose" interventions to treat all different types of anxiety, from specific phobias to panic disorder. Concentrated doses, or "intensives," allow the child to face challenges more quickly and build success upon success in a short period of time. Treatment time may be shortened because the therapist is able to build upon momentum, which saves precious weeks, months, and years of possible avoidance and silence. While the up-front cost is likely to be higher, the cost of a one-week intensive intervention might be less expensive compared over time to one year of weekly therapy sessions. Clinical evidence is demonstrating that intensive intervention not only shortens the overall time of intervention required but also the hours of brave practices necessary (Kurtz, 2013).

A single session during an intensive intervention may last anywhere from 2-5 hours. Typically, intensives consist of 3-5 consecutive days of these longer treatment sessions. The child's ability to maintain energy and focus should be considered in determining the length of a session. Parent finances may also be a consideration, as most insurance companies will not pay for more than "treatment as usual" (one 60-minute session per day). Another consideration may be a family's proximity to a qualified treating professional. Families that are driving longer distances for treatment will often need to spend more focused time with the therapist to achieve preliminary goals and develop a "map" for success upon returning home.



There are several options for "intensive" intervention, and the goal of the intervention may affect which option a family chooses: 


Individualized intensive treatment sessions at a therapist's office, with one-on-one behavioral treatment, parent training, and community practice. Longer treatment sessions may reduce the overall duration of treatment and may allow for more brave practice opportunities in one day, such as practicing a scavenger hunt in the office, followed by a scavenger hunt in Home Depot (with novel adults), and then ordering ice cream as a reward for the child's hard work. Rather than waiting a full week (or more) in between sessions, intensive sessions are scheduled for faster progression toward speech. Good intensive interventions have a multiple days in a row. This reduces warm-up time and allows for possibly parent-training component to help parents understand how to effectively elicit speech across settings, plan brave practices, and reward brave work. the school setting. Parent training should also support parents in advocating for their child in the school setting.


Intensive treatment sessions in the school setting, conducted by a therapist. In-school intensives may involve behavioral treatment for most of the school day, over several days. Goals might include working with teachers, staff, and peers to elicit speech, and practice brave talking in multiple school environments. The school-based intensive approach may also reduce warm-up time, allow for possibly faster progression toward speech, and may reduce the potential disruptions to the child's school schedule that long-term intervention involves. In-school intensives are incredibly useful in both intervening directly in the child's school, where the anxiety usually occurs, and at the same time training the staff on how to successfully interact with the child. However, these in-school intensives may not have a parent-training component, and finding a therapist who can travel to the school (and become licensed in a different state, if necessary) may be difficult. Conducting an intensive intervention in the school requires a (sometimes lengthy) planning and approval process; in order for the intensive intervention to be effective, the school must provide a private space to begin the intervention, provide teachers' schedules for brave practice opportunities, and allow the child to be pulled from the classroom during the intervention. The school may also have requests, such a background check for the therapist or parental consent for any other children who may be involved in the intervention. 

Intensive group treatment. Summer camps and weekly groups are available nationally for children with SM. The goal of these camps and groups is to simulate a classroom setting and allow the child to practice their brave behaviors with peers and adults in a group setting. Camps such as Confident Kids Camp (www.confidentkidscamp.com) are organized to


PARENT Pointer

Parents looking for providers in their area community practice. Longer treatment sessions may reduce the overall might look at the Selective Mutism Association (SMA) website under "Find Help" or reach out to other parents on social media (e.g., In addition to the list Facebook support groups). 
In additio in the list of providers posted on the SMA website there is a list of state coordinators who might be able to help point you toward experienced professionals in your community. Although these referral networks may be helpful, it is important to personally evaluate the treating provider to be certain that they have appropriate experience and will be an ideal fit for your child.

PARENT POINTER

There are many intensive intervention options for children older than 8; however, making the decision to take part in this type of treatment, treatment, with an older child, is something to consider carefully and in consultation with a highly qualified treating professional.



allow the child to practice anxiety-provoking school and public situations, such as responding to the teacher's questions, show-and-tell and oral presentations, ordering at an ice cream store, and participating verbally in group projects. Each child is paired with their own "camp counselor" - a trained adult who provides individualized support throughout the week. Camp provides a child with an opportunity for brave practice right before the start of a new school year or during other breaks from school, and children experience a large increase in speech during the week of camp and maintenance of those gains into the new school year. Camps offer intensive practice with no real disruption to the child's schedule (as most camps take place over the summer), provide direct peer practice, and allow parents and children to meet other families also working to overcome SM. A list of nation-wide camps and groups can be found on the Selective Mutism Association's website at www.selectivemutism.org.

It is important to note that for many families, intensive interventions aren't a stand-alone solution. They often provide an amazing boost in progress, build confidence in the child and family, and help train the parent and school quickly on the intervention plan. Nevertheless, follow-up after the intensive is almost always necessary either via phone consultations with the therapist who conducted the intensive or in-person behavioral therapy with a local therapist (perhaps in consultation with the expert). Some families find it helpful to have more than one intensive, such as doing an in-school week-long intensive to focus on obtaining more speech in school and training the school staff, and then attending a summer camp to revive brave work skills and obtain more peer practice before school starts.

Children who have expressed some interest in speaking more, children who are young (and therefore typically easier to treat), and/or children who have already made some progress toward speech are generally excellent candidates for an intensive intervention. An intensive intervention alone may not be a good fit if your child tires easily, is older (many professionals consider children older than age 8 to be more difficult to treat), demonstrates severe SM symptoms, or part in this type of absolutely refuses to engage in treatment. For these children, weekly behavioral treatment combined with school intervention and parent training might be the best beginning intervention plan.

Once you decide on a treatment option and a therapist, scheduling a diagnostic appointment is an important next step.

Evaluation and Diagnosis of Selective Mutism

A typical evaluation might include the following components:

1. An extensive interview with parents, including obtaining developmental and medical history along with current symptoms. The most important component to this evaluation is understanding the factors that influence WHERE the child speaks ("The Environment"), TO WHOM the child speaks (“The Audience"), and HOW the child communicates ("The Speech Demand"). We refer to these factors as Pathway Hazards because they can influence the difficulty level or the ability of the child to verbally engage. Establishing a baseline of the factors that influence your child's comfort level with speech, before treatment occurs, will be helpful for planning the intervention.

2. Questionnaires about anxiety, behavior, and SM. It is likely that the therapist will request that parents, teachers, and other caregivers fill out the questionnaires to obtain a more global perspective of speech and behavior. 3. A teacher interview and/or observation in the classroom. Because school is typically the most challenging environment for children to speak, it the school setting. is important to have a clear picture of their behavior and quality of speech in

4. Videos of the child: Provide videos of your child in their home environment, in the classroom and in community environments with communication partners. Having access to quick snapshots of the child at their most comfortable and at their least comfortable enables the therapist to get a sense of your child's current abilities and severity of symptoms.

5. Historical data about the child. Parents are encouraged to bring in past reports from psychologists, psychiatrists, school psychologists, occupational therapists, and speech-language pathologists, teachers' notes or past grade cards, data about previous evaluations or interventions (i.e., behavioral data taken during a school observation or clinical notes from previous interventions), and/or charts or worksheets parents have used in the past for behavioral change (e.g., reward charts).

6. A direct structured observation. Christopher Kearney (2006) describes behavioral observations as the "key lynchpin" of assessment and treatment of SM. They can confirm or rule out selective mutism, point to co-existing diagnoses, suggest the severity of speech reluctance, and guide the intervention. We recommend a structured observation in a school or clinical setting, involving the parent (or another adult with whom the child feels comfortable enough to speak). More information on how therapists can conduct a direct structured observation can be found in Dr. Kotrba's book, Selective Mutism: An Assessment and Intervention Guide for Therapists, Educators, and Parents.

7. A feedback session with intervention planning. In this separate session, the psychologist or therapist should sit down with parents, discuss the outcomes and findings of the evaluation, and connect these findings with research-based treatment plans.

PARENT POINTER

It is strongly recommended that parents sign a "Disclosure Form" between the therapist and the school, allowin the therapist to obtain information from and collaborate directly with the school. Your therapist should provide this form at the beginning of the evaluation or treatment.



Cataloguing Current Speaking Abilities & Challenge

The Audience, The Environment, and the Speech Demand

Current Abilities

With whom does the child speak, in which locations does the interaction take place, and how does your child respond to that person?









Current Challenges

In general (and in most cases), which factors present challenges for the child?

The Audience

Size of Audience

One-on-one
Small group Large group/public speaking
Larger group/public speaking

Familiarity of Audience

Novel (new) people
Familiar people
Contaminated people

Gender 
Men
Women

Age	
Adults
Children



The Environment
Familiarity with Environment 
Novel (new) place
Familiar place
Contaminated place

Perceived Privacy
Closed/private space 
Open/public

Other Environmental Factors
Crowded/chaotic place
Noisy place


The Speech Demand

Length/Type of Speech

Short responses
Longer responses 
Asking a question 
Starting a conversation
Asking for help 
Maintaining a conversation

Expectation/Comfort Level 
Concrete orautomatic answers (e.g. age, name, etc.) 
Planned, scripted, and/or practiced speech
Unexpected, unplanned and/or spontaneous speech
Greetings and polite words

Sound/Volume of Speech

Making sounds 
Whispering 
Using a full voice


Preparing Yourself and the Team for Intervention


After a diagnosis of selective mutism or social anxiety is confirmed, the real work begins. Hopefully you have now added a "guide" to your team - a therapist who is able to provide knowledgeable information, recommendations, and intervention. An important next step in the work of parents, teachers, and professionals is truly understanding the impact and nature of avoidance in selective mutism. Children feel anxious, fearful, or uncomfortable when they perceive a prompt to speak or engage, and therefore they take action to avoid that feeling of discomfort. While many adults and peers can become disheartened and even hurt by the fact that a child does not speak to them, please understand that the child is not avoiding a person out of dislike or disinterest. In fact, many children don't speak to their very favorite people! Instead, they are specifically avoiding the discomfort that follows a prompt to speak or engage. When they avoid, they are typically rescued - parents speak for them, a sibling answers for them, friends tell the teacher what they need, or others simply stop asking them questions that would require a verbal answer. This is usually done to help the child because it is clear they are uncomfortable, and others want to protect them. This feels like a relief for the child with selective mutism; they have avoided an uncomfortable interaction and they feel much better.



Throughout this journey, parents are encouraged to take care of their own emotional wellbeing. Ideas for self-care include relaxation, meditation, exercise, building a strong social network, reaching out for help, taking time out to re-energize, and planning enjoyable activities.


Parent PoiNTEr
The distress must be manageable! If the child is unable to manage the next step due to overwhelming distress, you may need to reconsider and adjust the level of difficulty. 
The benefit of building "challenge pathways" for our children is that they help us to think about and create a manageable step-wise approach to conquering difficult challenges by taking one small step at a time (especially if your child is able to help lay out the path!). We will provide more insight into challenge pathways in Chapters 5 and 7.


Anxiety is temporary and harmless, but avoidance can last a lifetime. When them at all! Instead, we are perpetuating a belief that they are unable to handle we allow and even encourage our children to avoid speaking, we aren't helping these situations and that being rescued is a better alternative. Adults should focus on small, incremental steps for children to learn new skills.

Retraining the Brain

Helping your child build distress tolerance and grit

Learning to tolerate distress is an incredibly important skill for children to develop. At times, parents (perhaps unknowingly) cause their children to feel distressed in order to secure positive long-term outcomes. At a young age, parents leave their children alone to sleep in their crib or in the care of others. This may be upsetting for the child but doing so teaches them to self-soothe and they learn that it is okay to sleep and play independent of their parents. When children are taken for vaccinations and medical treatments they might also feel distressed, but those necessary experiences serve to protect them from illness. poor choices. At some point, parents must begin disciplining their children for When a child is not getting their way, they certainly feel distressed but by allowing them to "own" their distress, they are learning self-control, how to cope with disappointment, and how to follow through on directions.

The experiences highlighted above are commonplace and necessary but as a parent, they can be painful to observe! It can be difficult (anxiety provoking be manageable! If and perhaps embarrassing) to watch our children suffer, cry, throw a tantrum, or take on challenging hurdles without stepping in to save them. However, we do a disservice to them by rescuing them from situations that they are likely capable of handling. Researcher Angela Duckworth examined characteristics of children who were the most "successful" - those who did the best at school, socially, and in the working world later in life. She found that the only common connection between these kids was "grit" - the ability to continue despite discomfort or strain. When we allow our children to struggle, we covertly say to them that they are capable of succeeding without our help, and we allow them to build confidence (developed only through grappling with something hard/stressful and making it through). Allowing trials in your child's life isn't a sign that you don't care about them - it's a sign that you care so much about them that you are willing to make yourself very uncomfortable in order for them to experience better long-term outcomes!

Learning to tolerate distress isn't easy, and typically requires both practice and an understanding that being uncomfortable doesn't mean your child is doing things wrong....it means they are doing things right! Just as great exercise workouts result in sore muscles now but strength in the long term, being pushed slightly out of their comfort zone is necessary to help them develop resolve in times of distress, over the long term. Both parents and children benefit from understanding that in and braver, discomfort is absolutely essential. 


Although we are suggesting that it is essential to "push" your child out of their comfort zone, be conscious of how often they are being challenged. If a child is constantly feeling "on the spot," they may feel taxed and less likely to "rise to the occasion." Some children may require a more nuanced and slower-paced approach.

You may be reading this and thinking that this all sounds great in theory, but how will I accomplish this? On the one hand, I'm being asked to challenge my child, but on the other hand, I'm being told that I should only push them slightly out of their comfort zone. What does this mean? How will I know when and how hard to push? The answers aren't always easy and you may not always know the right answer. We hope to help you find some answers in the next several chapters as we apply these theories to intervention specifically for SM. For now, we provide some broad and basic concepts to give you a better idea of what may be required:

Learn to manage your own discomfort while watching your child struggle 
Understand that there will be occasional failures
Trust that most children (yours included) can actually move more quickly in facing their fears than we imagine that they can
Provide your child with controlled experiences and practical scenarios where they can practice being brave (be creative!)

Help your child understand WHY you are asking them to feel uncomfortable (teach them about grit!)

Preparing Your Child

Discussing selective mutism

Tears stained Jessica's pillow. "Mom, I tried to talk to my friend in class today, but the words just got stuck! Now she must think I'm such a snob. She looked really upset and just walked away when I wouldn't answer her. What's wrong with me?"

Explaining weaknesses and challenges to your child is no easy feat. It is difficult to strike a balance between confidence-building, hope-inducing, developmentally appropriate and empathetic descriptions of selective mutism. There are many ways in which SM could be explained to a child; some involve using the words "selective mutism," while others simply use descriptors of the symptoms.

Tips for discussing SM with your child:

Start small and at an age appropriate developmental level. Younger children may need to understand very little about the process, except that we are practicing being brave when it is hard to get the words out. Older children can understand more, but may need that information to come in small increments.


PARENT POINTER

Consider adopting a mantra to silently repeat when your child becomes upset, distressed, or otherwise melting down.
It can be helpful and calming for parents to think and silently repeat something like, "I'm doing what's best for my child, I'm doing what's best for child" or "He will be ok, He will be ok" or "This work isn't easy but it's important!"



Talk to your child when both of you are calm, and not immediately following an anxiety-provoking experience.
Take care to talk with your child when you have their undivided attention (when you have them trapped in a car, they are a captive audience!). Normalize that everyone (adults, too!) has skills or behaviors that don't come easily for them. Give examples of other children who struggle with fears, weaknesses, or anxieties. You may even want to share some appropriate fears or worries of your own.
Empathize with your child and tell them you understand that they try, but have a hard time speaking to people outside of the home. These people do not get to see your child as the wonderful, smart, awesome person that you are blessed to know.
Give an age-appropriate description of anxiety and how it can cause us to avoid situations that are fearful. Depending on the age of your child, you can talk about the amygdala's role in anxiety and how this affects our body (fight, flight, or freeze response).
Talk about the benefits of repeated practice. These practices are very uncomfortable at first, and are certainly not easy, but when we do them over and over they can become less difficult and more comfortable. It may help to think of examples where your child learned something after a lot of practice like riding a bike, playing a new instrument, or learning an academic subject. Remind your child that they are not alone and that they have a whole team working to support them.
Convey the importance of becoming comfortable with the feeling of discomfort. When we feel this type of discomfort it means we are getting stronger and braver! It means that we are pushing ourselves past our comfort zone, or what is easy for us, and this effort is specifically what makes us grow!
Assure them that you are there to help support them, and discuss possible reinforcements for hard work (e.g., privileges or rewards the child can earn) as well as the intrinsic benefits of speaking (e.g., being able to ask for help at school, making and keeping friends and showing how smart they are). 
End on a positive note of love and hope.

As parents, you know your child best, including which information will be the most meaningful and what they will be likely to understand. For a younger child, the conversation should be shorter, and should highlight that you understand it is sometimes hard for them to talk to people, but you will be helping them learn to be brave and strong. It might be hard at first, but as they practice it will get easier. Parents might wish to use toys or puppets in these explanations.

Older children may be better suited for a longer explanation. For example, a conversation may sound like this:

Jessica, I know we have talked several times about how hard it is to get the words out at school. Lots of kids have things they struggle with like learning to read, doing math, or climbing the rock wall at school. You are fantastic at those things, but I know when you try to talk it feels frustrating because it is very hard and makes you uncomfortable. Do you remember how we talked to Dr. Smith last week and played at her office? She has given us some information to help explain why it's a challenge for you to speak in school. There is a part of our brain that acts as a guard dog - it tells us when we should be scared and when we are okay. Sometimes we have a really good guard dog, the kind that knows when someone really dangerous is coming to our door. At other times, our guard dog is like a yappy puppy - it barks at everything! It barks at the postman, neighbors on walks, and even squirrels! It's so hard to tell when we should be scared or uncomfortable, because it's constantly barking at the wrong times! Dr. Smith explained that your brain might be doing that - passing on the message that things are going to be scary, hard, or uncomfortable too frequently.

-

PARENT POINTER

If you do not feel as though you are capable of this conversation without help, a therapist or an understanding friend may be able to assist you in preparing for this discussion. You may also wish to have the therapist help you to deliver this message at your child's next therapy appointment.

Here is the great news,- we can train our guard dog to do a better job. We can ignore him Here is the great news when he is over-reacting to the danger of a situation, and we can choose to act brave even when we don't feel brave! Practicing things that are challenging is the way we learn to do anything new. Do you remember when you first learned to do gymnastics? You could do cartwheels and handstands, but the idea of doing those on the balance beam was really scary! At first, you just didn't want to do it, and you tried to stay away from the beam. You even cried a few times when it was your turn. With help, you started doing small things on the balance beam to get comfortable. As you got better, you tried harder and harder moves. It wasn't easy, and occasionally it was scary, but every time you did it you got better and became braver. Now you don't even really think about it when you do your beam routine!

-

Using your voice at school is just like that. You will have a brave coach - someone who helps you know what moves to do, tells you how quickly to try the next move, and supports you while you learn. Your job is to work really hard, and to try to be brave even when you are scared or uncomfortable. In fact, that is exactly what brave is - doing something even though you feel scared or uncomfortable! You can't be brave without feeling scared! I know that this won't always be easy, so dad and I came up with some really cool prizes you can earn for brave work including TV time, extra time on your tablet, and some toys I know you really want. It will also be nice to eventually use your brave voice because you will be able to talk to your friends at school and have fun on the playground with them.

I'm really excited to work on this together as a team! You are such a smart, brave girl and I know you are going to be fabulous. I love you very much and I'm so proud of you.

To give the child a more tangible example of how anxiety goes away with practice, you might bring along a sour candy. When we first put sour candy in our mouth, it is very uncomfortable! It tastes terrible, and we want very badly to spit it out! Yet we keep it in and keep sucking on it, and just when we feel like we can't suck on it any longer, it starts to get easier. Our mouth gets used to the sour taste and stops telling us that this experience is awful and uncomfortable. In order to we look back it seems manageable, and most of us would agree that we would be more confident to try sour candy again in the future. In fact, if we continued It is helpful to begin eating sour candies, eventually we would stop registering the sour taste.

It's not uncommon for kids to protest during this talk, making statements about how they can't do it, they aren't scared but instead just don't want to talk, don't care about prizes, etc. They may even become tearful. Be careful not to get feel that the behavior is into a debate. You are not trying to convince them of the plan or their diagnosis. Simply acknowledge their feelings ("This feels like it will be really hard" or "You aren’t sure you are ready to do this hard work” and then move on.

When explaining SM to kids, it's probably best NOT to use the term "shy." simply being obstinate Shyness is a temperamental characteristic and suggests that the child is always and rude. Neither of these inhibited and quiet. For many kids with SM, this simply isn't the case. While they may be quiet and inhibited in school, they can be outgoing, loud, assertive, and the child's challenges and they like to have fun in comfortable settings. Instead, describe the difficulty they have when using their voice with some people or talking in large groups.


PARENT POINTER

It is helpful to begin educating other caregivers or family members about SM. It is not uncommon for family members to feel that the behavior is either very typical and needs no intervention 
OR very atypical and suggestive of a child simply being obstinate and rude. Neither of these are helpful responses to the children’s challenges and may cause more harm.

The child needs coaches and supporters, not reinforcers of avoidance and criticizers. Give books to grandparents and caregivers, encourage them to look at good websites on SM (refer to resources listed in Chapter 1) and provide them with some of the informational handouts from this book.

Helpful Handout
I AM BRAVE!
Help your child recall times in the past when they have mastered challenges, learned new things and conquered fear; assist them in understanding that they can be BRAVE! 



Recognizing and Managing Discomfort

Be comfortable with discomfort!

Beyond educating your child on what SM is and how it works, it is typically beneficial to teach the child stress management techniques. While research suggests that the most helpful component of behavioral treatment for SM is exposure therapy (also referred to as brave practice), it is generally beneficial for children to have some calming strategies to use in the midst of anxiety-provoking situations.

Have you ever seen an Olympic swimmer before a meet? They stretch their muscles, take deep breaths, visualize the pool, and prepare themselves physically and mentally for the race. They understand that although they feel anxious and nervous, they can take charge of the anxiety so that it doesn't ruin their performance. First, they begin using a calm breath. They slow down their breathing, let their shoulders fall down away from their ears, and try to relax their muscles. They focus on slowly breathing in so that their stomach blows up like a balloon, and breathing out so that their balloon deflates. This is called I AM BRAVE! diaphragmatic breathing, and research shows it reduces muscle tension and heart Help your child recall rate, allows mental function to slow and relax, improves concentration, and boosts times in the past when confidence (Mayo Clinic Staff, 2011).
Next, tensing and relaxing muscles is helpful in releasing muscle tension. understanding that they experience the looseness of muscle relaxation. There are many good audio tracks groups or an entire body, and then release. The release feels good and allows us to by Donna


B. Pincus. Furthermore, there are apps for relaxation such as PacificaTM, Belly BioTM, MindshiftTM, and Smiling MindTM.

Finally, parents and professionals can help children understand anxiety and the tricks it can play on us. When our yappy guard dog is barking, it is hard to tell the difference between real danger and a false alarm. Yet that is what anxiety usually is – a false alarm. If we can begin to understand and even predict when or where our brain will send us a false alarm, we can be prepared and simply work through it.

For example, if you were at work, and at 2 pm suddenly all the fire alarms began going off, you would likely rocket up in fear, grab your belongings quickly, and get out of the building! You would believe that you were in danger, and you would act on that potential danger. However, let's say that your boss came in that morning and told you there would be a test of the fire alarm system at 2 pm. You should stay at your desk and continue to work; they are just making sure the emergency system is in full working order. At 2 pm, when the system goes off, you will have predicted the sound and will continue to work, despite the discomfort of the alarm. You knew it was coming, and you knew it was a false alarm that provided no useful information. If we can prepare children with this same knowledge about their own brain and body, then when the alarms go off they can be confident in their ability to ignore the false warnings.

Finally, teaching kids to rate how hard situations or brave practices might be can provide valuable information and a way to communicate about their worries. Talk to your child about the difference between easy, medium, and hard brave work. Provide a visual rating scale (1 to 5 for younger children, 1 to 10 for older children) and describe how the different ratings might feel. Visual rating scales are easy to find on the internet, and you can tailor the one you use to your individual child - search "child SUD scale" (which stands for child subjective units of distress scale). Then, either provide example situations to the child and ask them to rate the difficulty, or ask the child to give you examples of what would be a 1, 5, or 10 on their scale. Asking the child what is scary, fearful, or worrisome is not as effective as asking them how "hard" a situation would be, as many children with SM do not self-identify speaking as "scary."

PARENT PointER

It is helpful to provide children with coping statements for times when the "fire alarm" is blaring but there is no danger including, "I can do this even when it's hard," "I can act brave even when
I'm scared," "I'm not going to let these worries stop me," or "I've done really hard things before because I'm strong and brave."



Anxiety Rating Scale
This handout may be used with your child to rate the difficulty level of engaging; (1) with people - the e of speaking - the speech demand. The (2) in different places - the child might be instructed to think about (1) Who is it easy/hard to speak with? (2) Where is it easy/hard to speak? (3) What kind of speaking is easy/hard? Each column is independent and parents are encouraged to help the child fill in the blanks by providing them with examples (e.g. Where would grandma be on the sheet? What about the doctor? How hard is it to speak at church/school/baseball? Is whispering easier than speaking in full volume?) and also encourage the child to think of possible entries (e.g. Who else might be a 3? Where would speaking be a 5?)

Very EASY

The Audience

The Environment

The Speech Demand

EASY

2 
The Audience

The Environment

The Speech Demand


FAIR 3

The Audience

The Environment

The Speech Demand



HARD 4
The Audience

The Environment

The Speech Demand


Very HARD 5

The Audience

The Environment

The Speech Demand


Establishing a Reinforcement Plan (Reward System)
One strategy for both increasing the likelihood of brave work completion, as well as helping add a twist of fun and excitement to the brave work, is including a simple reward system (Pinterest has thousands of ideas!). The main components of a great reward system include:

Goal behaviors: What behavior do you want to see increase?
Tokens: Items that signify movement toward rewards such as stickers, poker chips, points, etc. Tokens should be paired with verbal praise when praise is well-tolerated.
Rewards: Rewards might include larger prizes that have to be earned over several work sessions like smaller dollar store gifts, treats, access to TV/computer/tablet, privileges, extra time with parents, etc. 
Creativity and consistency: Even the best reward system can get old - parents should be creative, regularly add to the reward list, and be consistent about “paying out" when the child earns a reward or privilege. 
A great tracking sheet of accomplishments: Parents are encouraged to add stickers, notes, or decals to the Victory Valley worksheet when an important brave step is taken. It is rewarding for children to see their accomplishments and be reminded of the wonderful things they are achieving!

PARENT PointER

Beware possible errors in reward systems! These include not paying out for prizes when earned, inconsistency, lack of change to reward systems over time, giving up too early on reward systems, goal behavior, or prizes/ privileges that aren't truly motivating for a child.


Some parents are concerned about reward systems and feel that they are "bribing" the child for speech. Bribing is very different from rewarding; bribing is defined as giving a prize first in order to provoke the behavior (e.g., a child tells the parent that if they have a hamster, they will talk to their teacher, so the parent buys the child a hamster to evoke speech). Bribery generally occurs in distress; the parent is feeling upset and hopeless and is willing to do or give the child anything in order for them to be successful. Rewards are clear outcomes for appropriate or positive behavior. They are thoughtful and tied directly to a prosocial behavior. Reward systems are particularly useful because they result in repeated practice of a challenging behavior, and as the child practices repeatedly, they become more comfortable with the discomfort of speech. Furthermore, there is evidence that reward systems increase self-esteem, encourage children to make progress toward a goal, and make challenges more enjoyable.

Reward systems work for children of all ages. Young children will need very an instantaneous return on investment. specific goals with quick "payouts" -an instantaneous return on investment.
Thus, keeping small dollar store prizes, candy, or stickers on hand allow children to feel immediate pride. Tracking larger goals for young children can be done (in conjunction with an immediate reward) on a clear and fun handout or poster. For example, when a young child responds to her dance teacher's forced-choice question (goal behavior), they can get an immediate M&M, as well as a sticker on a "Brave Chart" working toward a larger prize.

PARENT POINTER

Getting creative with rewards may be helpful or even necessary for kids who have very limited (or very expensive) interests; for instance, a unique reward may be getting to play the Pie In the Face TM with a parent or a therapist.


Helpful HANDOuts

Race Car Rally Reward Tracking 
Use this worksheet to help your child track small steps toward reaching a goal. 

Create Your Own Challenge, Design Your Own Reward
Use this handout to motivate your child to work toward and conquer a larger challenge. 

Money Motivator Reward Tracking 
This reward tracking worksheet is most appropriate for children who are learning the value of money or for those who understand the value of money. 

Weekly Goals 
This worksheet may be used at school, daycare, home, etc. It may be most impactful when used in the school setting, allowing toward "brave" goals and with parents.


Older children and teens can understand the idea of "saving" toward a slightly larger reward. This can be tracked using anything convenient to the parents and engaging to the child, including marbles in a jar, checkmarks on a chart, points, "brave bucks" or poker chips. Older children may still enjoy tangible prizes, but many tweens and teens prefer earning privileges such as screen time, fun family activities, later bed time, movies, use of the phone, or special time with mom or dad. Parents should make these prizes or privileges within reach; making a goal too big (e.g., 100 points) may result in a child giving up before reaching the end. 

The key to a good reward system is making it engaging (fun, bright charts) and reinforcing (prizes or privileges MUST be something your child wants or looks forward to). These plans need to be explained to the child so that they understand what behavior they need to do and what they can earn by doing it. Each time they meet the goal behavior, they should be reminded of what they did and what they earned ("You answered the question from your teacher with your brave voice great job. You earned a point, and now you have 4 points. You only need 2 more before you earn a family movie night - keep working hard!").



PARENT POINTER

Each challenge pathway conquered (or a difficult step accomplished) is an opportunity to claim a victory! Don't forget to help your child keep track of  their victories on the Victory Valley worksheet if they find it motivating (chapter 7).


Parents can give out extra tokens for brave behavior outside of the specific goal behavior if the child has gone above and beyond expectations. It is important that tokens are not taken away for bad behavior, failure to meet a specified goal, or other reason. Once the child has earned a token, it is theirs to keep, no matter any how they do on future challenges.

Some children will begin to ask for rewards. If the child seems to be providing a simple reminder of brave work completed or if they are able to initiate their request to a new communication partner (such as their therapist), we would likely choose to comply with their request. On the other hand, some children will refuse to do brave work unless they are reinforced with rewards, and this is not a situation parents want to promote. Ideally, rewards encourage bravery, but with time and practice, rewards should be less necessary because there is less anxiety associated with the task. Eventually, an external reward will not be necessary because the child will feel an internal reward - the feeling of accomplishment that comes with positive social interactions.

Tracking, goal setting, and development of reinforcement systems can be tricky, especially for children who are very "stuck" in their anxiety. We always encourage parents and schools to reach out to mental health professionals with SM expertise when struggling to set up or perfect a reward system.
Keeping Organized

For some of us, keeping organized and staying on top of all the "to-dos" and help your child keep track paperwork can feel overwhelming. Consider a binder or digital filing system with clearly marked folders to help keep everything in one place and easily accessible. The example system below provides a way of organizing documents and information that might be helpful.


Notes Folder
Make notes, keep a log of progress and challenges:

Interactions that are notable 
Brave work
Successes/challenges at school, with family, friends, at church, in therapy, etc.

Medical/Therapy/Insurance Folder
Insurance benefits information 
Names, addresses, contact info for service providers
Paperwork from office visits 
Test Results
Payment information & progress toward deductible

Planning & Worksheets Folder
Keep a record of the hard work that your child has completed and plans for the future!

Worksheets & planning sheets from this book
Your child's psychologist, school counselor, speech therapist, etc. may provide worksheets as well

School Folder
Special Education Plans (IEP, 504, accommodations, etc.)
Communications with teachers, admin and staff
Progress reports, report cards and state testing results
School work examples

Research Folder
As you begin to research SM, place materials in this folder so they will be available when needed:
Notes on treatment options, books, topics that you've researched or have an interest in researching 
Medical research

Miscellaneous Folder
If it doesn't fit any where else, put it here!

We have accomplished a lot while traversing the Foundational Foothills and preparing for the rest of the journey ahead - we've learned about the people who can help guide us, and how to prepare ourselves, our team, and our child for a successful intervention. We've taken time to review and become familiar with Mount Mindful and many of the skills that will help children be more mindful and aware during the intervention. In the next chapter we provide the tools that will help your child progress through the main domains of Peers Peak, Community Crest, and School Summit to find their brave voice. Learning how to use these tools flexibly will help you craft an individualized plan with unique challenge pathways to help your child overcome selective mutism!

Selective Mutism
An Overview for Treating Professionals

What is selective mutism (SM)?

Selective mutism is a childhood anxiety disorder characterized by a child's inability to speak and communicate effectively in select social situations, such as school. Children with SM are able to speak and communicate in situations where they are comfortable, secure, and relaxed (usually with their family at home).

SM is NOT normal shyness, stubbornness, or deliberate defiance. It is currently understood as a type of social anxiety and children with SM may have a fear of others hearing their voice.

Key Behavioral Indicators

Ability to speak normally with some people, but may use a whisper or modified voice, provide only a very short response, or may not speak at all.

"Blank" or "expressionless" face when speech is expected.

Avoids eye contact.

Awkward/stiff body language

May communicate nonverbally - nodding, pointing, and even smiling but they will not speak.

SM impacts each child very differently, however some common impacts include: 
Difficulty speaking in the school environment 
Situational avoidance in speaking with neighbors, unfamiliar adults & children, and even some relatives outside of the immediate family
Struggling to speak in environments and with people where there is a history of avoidance Difficulty in starting new activities and meeting new people

When does SM usually begin and how long will it last?

SM is typically noticed at the start of daycare, preschool or kindergarten but many caregivers observe signs and symptoms earlier. For the majority of children with SM, intervention will be necessary in the form of exposure based behavioral therapy with a therapist. Children who do not receive effective treatment may continue to struggle with SM into the elementary, middle and in some cases, high school years.

Why do children develop SM?

SM is generally understood to have genetic, biological, environmental and temperamental components. It is NOT caused by trauma, abuse, or bad parenting.

Ideal treatment for children with SM: 
Exposure based behavioral therapy with a therapist (preferably with experience or willing to learn and consult with an SM expert) 
Parent training and school support so that parents and the school become comfortable with and part of the intervention team 
Gradual exposure to situations where the child is able to take small steps to conquering challenges (e.g. speaking with teachers, ordering food, etc.)
Medical intervention with SSRI when necessary

Learn more about Selective Mutism:

selectivemutism.org 
childmind.org
selectivemutismlearning.org

Diagnostic Codes for Selective Mutism 
SM is considered an anxiety disorder and is coded for billing purposes as 313.23 (F94.0).

I am Brave
Instructions: Fill in the blanks below to recall ways in which you've been brave!

ONE List three ways in which you have been brave.

TWO List three things you've learned that were hard at first but now seem easier (e.g. swimming, tying your shoes, learning to add double digits, etc.)

THREE How do you feel when it's hard to speak in some situations?

FOUR How do you feel a when you are brave by conquering a new challenge or speaking? Do you feel excited? Happy? Relieved?

FIVE How might you feel if you could speak every time you need to speak?

SIX Think of five positive things that have happened because you were willing to try something hard. (e.g. getting to swim in the deep end, making the math team, having a sleepover, etc.)

Race Car Rally
Instructions: Check off each triangle flag on the roadway (or place a sticker over the flag) and write down each Race Car Rally positive step toward reaching a goal in the table below.

My Goal:

#

My Reward:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

START


Create Your Own Challenge Example
Design Your Own Reward!

Instructions: Use the spaces below to document ten instances of brave work. If you choose, small items or privileges may add up to a larger reward (use the space on the bottom to create a list). Allow child to draw a picture of their reward or document their feelings below.


Brave Work Practice: Gesturing, giving and taking

1

6/7/18: At the store, she handed the cashier a credit card and took the bag

6

2

6/8/18: She took a cookie from our neighbor and looked up at her

7

3

6/9/18: She smiled at the usher and handed him the tickets

8

4

6/10/18: Shook her head yes at the dry cleaners when asked if is she was going swimming!

9

5

6/12/18: On our walk, a neighbor stopped us and she didn't look down! She even smiled a little when the neighbor said, "See you later."


Mon

Mo

دو

6/14/18: Smiled at the mail carrier and took the mail

6/15/18: Handed the library card to the librarian and shook her head no when the librarian asked, "Have you read this book?"

6/17/18: At the store, handed money to cashier and received the change

6/18/18: At the sandwich shop, pointed to the toppings she wanted and smiled

10 6/19/18: Waved goodbye to a family friend!


Draw your reward (or feelings) here: Special day with mommy


If applicable, write down and check off small items or privileges here:

On my day with mommy:

√

Donut for breakfast

Special TV time

Go to nail salon

Pizza for lunch Go to a movie

Candy at movie Make a craft

Extra IPAD time

Ice cream after dinner
 ✅Stay up late



Money Motivator Reward Tracking
This reward system can be used in conjunction with any challenge your child is working to overcome. Just add check marks each time "money" is earned in the appropriate bubble. At the end of each week or when you decide the "challenge" is over, help your child to calculate the money value of the marks they earned. If you choose, use the worksheet on the following page to record weekly totals toward a specific larger reward. This system works best for older children.

TOTALS:

X $0.25 =

IJNENTORICA

J18

DOLLARN

PHORRALHESERVE NOTRE

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

C81230251 BE

3

3

C01230251 0

3

43

ONE DOLLAR

X $1.00 =

10

DB 89291380 A,

THE UNITED STATES

82

OF AMERICA

DU 90881380

DOLLARS

X $5.00 =

X $10.00 =

Q

$1

$5

$10

+




Money Motivator Reward Tracking
Total sheets

I need to earn : $_____ to buy: ______


Weekly Goals
Name





Conceptualization of Selective Mutism

MAINTAINING the Selective Mutism Cycle

The Cycle of Avoidance

START: Child is addressed and expected to speak
Child is unable to speak (does not answer, freezes, avoids eye contact)
Everyone is uncomfortable and unsure of how to proceed
Adult seeks to reduce discomfort (speaks for the child or removes expectation to speak)
Adult responds to the interaction (comforts, scolds, or ignores)

Maintaining the cycle
Child FEELS Anxious
Child FEELS Anxious
Child FEELS relieved and less anxious in the moment
Child will FEEL anxious in similar situations (anxiety maintained)


BREAKING the Selective Mutism Cycle Reducing Anxiety when Speech is Required

START: Child is addressed and expected to speak
Child is unable to speak (does not answer, freezes, avoids eye contact)
Adult adjusts expectations and the prompts become more specific to the child's current ability
Child is given sufficient time and guidance (if necessary) to respond/engage
Adult acknowledges any effort toward engagement with quick and precise praise
Adult (and child if willing/able) decide when to take the next step to more challenging social interactions

The cycle is broken! Each time the child engages (even slowly, quietly, or nonverbally), it will be easier and more natural for them to do so the next time!









Breaking the cycle


Child FEELS Anxious

Child FEELS Anxious

Child FEELS uncomfortable but does engage

Child will FEEL less anxious in similar situations






It is completely natural (and even socially expected) to "help" a young child when we see them struggle. Parents and other "rescuers" are not to blame - we do NOT cause the presentation of SM although we may contribute to the maintenance cycle. We need to re-learn what it means to "help" so that we can help in a different way - breaking the cycle! Think about the people who rescue your child. It might be worth sharing an explanation of the cycles with these individuals (in an age appropriate manner).
