Chapter Six
EDUCATION PLANNING:
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW TO SUPPORT YOUR CHILD AT SCHOOL

Many children with selective mutism experience significant anxiety throughout their regular school day. They fear being called on, they may feel like they are the center of attention at all times, and they worry about what people would say, do, or expect of them if they do talk. Since this fear in the school setting impacts so much of the child's day, it is vital to begin the process of planning appropriate interventions and accommodations with your child's school.

Depending upon the age of your child, the assistance that they need will vary. Children are typically identified or diagnosed with selective mutism between the ages of 6 and 8, putting them in early elementary school (and a large majority of those children will be in the public education setting). In this chapter, we focus on education planning for the elementary years but we do recognize and highlight the impacts of helpful accommodations for SM during the preschool years as well as the middle/high school years.

Common Impacts of Selective Mutism in the School Setting

Preschool

Difficulty or inability to respond to the teacher in the classroom, and therefore struggles with group activities, circle time, show and tell, and verbal assessments
Difficulty requesting to use the bathroom
Difficulty eating lunch when others are present

Elementary School

All impacts listed for preschool 
Inability to ask clarifying questions or request help from the teacher 
Difficulty or inaccuracy in the academic assessment process 
Difficulty or inability to benefit from social learning opportunities 
Difficulty or inability to engage the help of others when necessary for educational, health or safety reasons Inappropriate behaviors or feelings under normal circumstances 
Difficulty or inability to participate in group work or group projects

Middle/High School

All of the impacts listed for elementary school
Difficulty or inability to participate in oral presentations 
Difficulty making and keeping friends 
Inability to learn through repetition of concepts by teaching others Inability or difficulty completing independent, age appropriate tasks (e.g. driving, pumping gas, etc.)

PARENT POINTER

We outline the basic steps, but for more detailed information we recommend parents visit the Wright's Law website at wrightslaw.com it is filled with extensive detail about the process and what to expect.



Given the significant impacts that SM may have on a child's social and academic functioning in the school setting, many children will need accommodations, assistance or special education services in the school setting to ensure they meet their greatest potential.

The chart on the next page, Establishing an Education Plan for your Child, provides an eight step process to help navigate a public education system full of unspoken rules and steps that are not always obvious to parents. Navigating the education system is probably more of an art than a science.

1 Understand Options for Accommodations and Special Education

Every child in our country has the right to a free, appropriate public education (FAPE). When a child is unable (due to emotional, physical, social, or reasons) to obtain that free, appropriate education, accommodations and/or interventions should be provided to assist the child. This can be accomplished in three ways - Individualized Education Plans, Section 504 Plans, and unofficial accommodations. The path you take depends on your child's needs, the severity of their challenges, the school's resources, and the intervention team's recommendations.

Individualized Education Plan (IEP)

An IEP is a document that outlines the needs of the child, the services that will be provided to meet those needs in the school setting, and the goals that child is expected to meet over the course of the year. In order to qualify for an IEP, the child must meet certain criteria in different categories and their school performance must be impacted by the challenges that they face. Because an IEP is the only special education plan offering direct service with school support staff and is highly regulated, it is typically the plan that we recommend considering first. (It is important to note that private schools do not typically provide special education services or implement IEPs, so this may not be an option if your child is in a private school with no public funding).


It is not enough to simply have a clinical diagnosis of a learning, behavioral, or emotional disorder - the school must also deem that the child's academics are adversely impacted by their symptoms in order to qualify for special education services.

In total, there are 13 categories under which a child could qualify for special education services. The three categories outlined below are the most commonly used for children with selective mutism:

Speech/Language Impairment (SLI) - 
defined as a communication disorder that adversely affects a child's learning. A language disorder "may be characterized by difficulty in understanding and producing language, including word meanings (semantics), the components of words (morphology), the components of sentences (syntax), or the conventions of conversation (pragmatics)" (Head Start, 2006). Children with selective mutism may have primary disabilities in speech (including semantics, articulation, and fluency), but they also have social pragmatic speech weaknesses (the ability to utilize speech effectively in social situations).

—

Other Health Impairment (OHI) - 
defined by IDEA as a chronic or acute health condition which limits alertness in the educational environment due to either limited strength, vitality, and alertness or heightened alertness to the surrounding environment; these must impair academic performance (Grice, 2002).

Emotional Disturbance/Disability (ED) - 
defined by IDEA as one or more of the following emotional or behavioral issues:

An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual, sensory, or health factors
An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and teachers
Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal circumstances A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression
A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school problems

Many schools do not have extensive knowledge of SM, and therefore may not realize the adverse impacts that SM can have on learning. They may also be unaware that children with SM are often eligible for special education services with an IEP under one these three categories due to the significant adverse effects SM has on a child's social and academic functioning.

Section 504 Plan

If a child does not qualify for special education services or whose needs do not warrant individualized intervention in the school, such as one-on-one services, a Section 504 Plan might be considered to provide accommodations in the general education setting. A Section 504 Plan is not considered special education, but it is an “adaptations and modifications" plan specifically intended for the classroom setting (mandated by the civil rights law establishing the rights of individuals with disabilities). This document provides the child with in-classroom ccommodations, but no direct, individualized services are inherently included (i.e., the child will not obtain one-on-one sessions). A Section 504 Plan may be an appropriate fit for students with mild to moderate SM who do not need specialized services but instead need minor accommodations for specific situations, such as oral presentations or participation points in the classroom setting. Later in this chapter, we provide a list of common accommodations provided to children with SM in the classroom.

The graphic below is intended to highlight the differences between an IEP and a 504 Plan. Knowing the differences and understanding the process for obtaining these specialized education services is a great starting point and may help you feel more confident when requesting help from your child's school.


HELPFul Handout

IEP Category Request Form

This form outlines the three most common categories for which children with SM may be found eligible for special education services. The form can be provided to the school with the IEP request letter (also known as special education consideration) or it may used to dispute the category your child has been assigned.



Key Differences between an IEP and a 504 Plan




Accommodations
If a child is attending a private school or has mild SM, an unofficial accommodation plan may be considered. Private schools are not legally mandated to provide services, switching to special education services or even 504 Plans to students with disabilities but may (and should) still allow for accommodations within the classroom or even direct intervention in the school. This plan may have similar characteristics to an IEP or Section 504 Plan but does not have governmental oversight.


PARENT POINTER
Requesting special education services for your child does NOT mean that you are asking for your child to be placed in a "self- contained" special education classroom. You are requesting services so that your child can remain in the general education setting

PARENT POINTER

If a private school is not providing adequate service, switching to a public school may be considered as an avenue to obtain the services your child needs to succeed.


Establishing an Education Plan for your Child
More Formal Path
Individualized Education Plan (IEP)
Formal written request for a comprehensive evaluation delivered to school
IEP evaluation carried out by the school, including observation
If eligible, a meeting will be scheduled to develop an IEP. A 504 plan may be suggested if IEP is denied
The IEP meeting will result in a customized IEP tailored to the needs of the child.
Accommodations and services are delivered as mandated by the IEP
Progress reviewed often to determine if a more formal plan is necessary to ensure needs are being met
Goal-setting annually with a formal re-evaluation every three years required by law


Less Formal Path
504 Plan or Accommodations
Informal request for a meeting with the teacher and/or other school personnel
Meet with teacher and other school personnel, share knowledge about SM, your child, and specific requests
School/teacher determines feasibility of requests and will either agree to or deny accommodations
A 504 plan will be formalized (varies by district) or accommodations plan finalized
Accommodations are delivered as specified by a 504 plan or an accommodation plan
Progress should be reviewed as often as possible to ensure needs and goals are being met
An annual review of accommodations with a new teacher is suggested. Switch to formal path if necessary.


Understand the Options

1

Request Help from School

2
Determine Needs

3

Eligibility Decided 
4

IEP Meeting/Write a Plan

5
Services/Accommodations Delivered



6

Review Progress

7
Re-evaluate Needs

8



PARENT POINTER

Before sending your request letter to the school, make a copy for your own records.

HELPFUL HANDOUT
IEP Request Letter (also known as special education consideration)

An example letter to the school requesting an IEP or a Section 504 Plan. This form may 被modified to request unofficial accommodations as well.


2 Request Help from the School

Once you've determined the best path forward for help (IEP, 504 or unofficial accommodations), you must contact the school and request a meeting.

If you believe that your child might be eligible for special education services with an IEP, they must be "referred" (or brought to the attention of the special education team at the school). The most effective way to refer your child is to write a letter to the principal and special education administrator at the school (copy the teacher as well) outlining your concerns and requesting an evaluation for special education consideration. It is important that parents take this official route of requesting, in order to get the best and most efficient response from the school. We provide a sample IEP meeting request letter (also known as special education consideration) at the end of this chapter.

To meet the requirements of consideration for a special education evaluation to obtain an IEP, a formal written request is necessary to ensure an evaluation will be scheduled. Having a note from a physician or psychologist stating a diagnosis or a need is not enough.

Your written request should include the date, the reasons for your concern, contact information, and if you are trying to bolster your effort, you might include the IEP category designation that you believe your child might best fit. By including the IEP category handout at the end of the chapter, you are providing the school team with the most common categories that are used to justify eligibility for children with SM and demonstrating that you are aware that other children with SM have qualified for special education services. Parents are encouraged to highlight their specific concerns, particularly the ways in which the child is impacted academically by selective mutism.

After receiving the letter, the school will schedule a multi-disciplinary meeting where the team will discuss which evaluations need to be completed in order to determine eligibility. It may be wise to contact the school district's special education department to inquire about the timeline for evaluation and determining eligibility as they can vary by state or district.

If you prefer a Section 504 Plan or an accommodation plan, generally a letter or phone call requesting a meeting with the school to discuss possible accommodations is sufficient but it certainly wouldn't hurt to submit the more formal written request.

3 Determine Needs

Next, the school will conduct an evaluation to determine if the child meets the criteria for special education or accommodations. Parents will be asked to provide consent for their child to be evaluated; the parent may request at that time to receive a list of tests, observations, or questionnaires that will be used during the evaluation process. For children with selective mutism, it is important that a few evaluative tools are used:

1. Appropriate questionnaires, including the Selective Mutism Questionnaire (Bergman, 2012) and general anxiety or emotional/behavioral questionnaires, such as the Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children (March, 1998) or Behavioral Assessment System for Children (Reynolds & Kamphaus, 2015) 
2. An interview with parents to ascertain background information, including the speaking behavior of the child in school, in public, and in the home setting 
3. An observation of the student in the classroom setting, in less structured academic settings (e.g., recess or lunch), and in performance-based settings (e.g., during a group project or when called upon by the teacher)

4. A video of the child speaking comfortably in the home setting, if possible 
5. A speech evaluation (if indicated) examining both receptive and expressive communication


If your child is currently seeing a therapist outside of the school or was evaluated by a therapist outside of the school system, provide their reports, or request a letter from the therapist detailing why the child meets the diagnosis of SM, what they are currently working on in treatment, and the specific recommendations the therapist might have for school intervention or goals. Parents are also allowed to invite outside therapists to meetings as support or another source of information. Schools are not bound to take all of the recommendations by an outside therapist, but they do have to consider them.

4 Eligibility Decided


The appropriateness and eligibility requirements for an IEP, Section 504 Plan or unofficial accommodations are different and each of these options has a distinct threshold for meeting requirements.

IEP eligibility is determined by whether the child meets the definitions doesn't have a formal IEP of IEP disability categories listed in IDEA. If the child's needs cannot be addressed through education in a general education classroom alone, schedule a meeting with and if these challenges impact educational performance, a child will be deemed eligible for services as outlined in their IEP.
Section 504 Plan eligibility is determined by whether a child fits the Section 504 definition of a disability. Do they have a physical or mental information to your child's impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities? If the answer is yes, then the child will be deemed eligible for a 504 Plan to meet their specific needs (Wright & Wright, 2007).


PARENT POINTER

If the school is not using the right evaluative tools, you may request more appropriate tools to be included as part of the evaluation process.

PARENT POINTER
Just because your child doesn’t have a formal IEP or 504 plan does NOT man that you cannot schedule a meeting with the teacher, counselor, or a school administrator. 
Each new year is an opportunity to provide important information to your child’s school/teacher so that they can better work with your child.

PARENT POINTER

If 30 days pass with no word from the school, do not hesitate to call the school, email, or send another letter as a reminder.

HELPFUL Handout
The Getting to Know Me Form with a photo of your child and the Quick Tips for Successful Communication handouts can be helpful for specials and substitute teachers who do not see your child every day. Consider requesting that these handouts be provided to substitute teachers.





Unofficial Accommodation Plan eligibility will be solely decided at the discretion of the school. The needs of the child will be considered and weighed against the school's ability to carry out the needed accommodations. The school may be more willing to help if they have sufficient resources available.

If your child is deemed eligible for an IEP with special education services, the school has 30 days to schedule a collaborative meeting to review your child's reminder. needs (the IEP Meeting) at a time that is convenient for the parents and the school team. If you have not done so already, you are advised to "align your ducks," in other words, make sure you are prepared and confident for the IEP meeting. Who will attend the meeting along with you, what resources and information will need to bring, and what are the main intervention goals and accommodations wish to discuss on your child's behalf?


If an IEP is not deemed an appropriate fit for your child, the school team and parents should still convene to discuss the needs of the child and make a plan to assist him/her outside of the confines of an IEP. Perhaps a 504 Plan or accommodations might be a better fit.

5 IEP Meeting/Make a Plan

The IEP meeting (or a less formal meeting if an IEP isn't appropriate) is an opportunity to bring together your child's team of helpers and experts to plan possible interventions, accommodations, and to set goals that will ultimately lead to your child receiving the best educational experience possible. The meeting will include parents and your child's school team which might include the principal, teachers, interventionists (speech pathologist, social worker, school psychologist), and any outside counsel the parents wish to include. Outside counsel may include additional caregivers, advocates, or outside therapists. It is important that the interventions and the goals set are specifically designed to increase confidence and bravery. It is essential that practices be designed to take place in a slow, stepwise manner. For instance, if a child is seeing a speech pathologist, they may eventually have a goal of working on articulation or pragmatics, but the first goal will generally be to increase speech. Goals should provide steps for moving variety systematically from avoidance or nonverbal responding to verbal responding, of contexts and with a variety of individuals.


The following handouts are available at the end of this chapter. These handouts meetings and beyond. are helpful to provide to meeting attendees and can be used during planning meeting是and beyond.

IEP Meeting Notes Template Meetings can be a whirlwind of information and oftentimes it can be difficult to recall details. We recommend using this template to take notes during IEP/planning meetings.

IEP Goal Planning Sheet & Example This document will assist you in helping to take a more active role in developing goals for your child's IEP. We recommend reviewing this form prior to the meeting and thinking about possible accommodations/services that may help your child. This form may be viewed as a working document during goal planning meetings. In addition to the blank form, we've included an example of a completed form.


Services/Accommodations Goal Tracking Form and Example The blank version of this form may be used by service/accommodation providers to track your child's progress, to help you to verify that services are being regularly performed, and to note your child's progress toward their goals. Ultimately, for a child with SM, this means that service/accommodation providers are effectively moving your child toward increased speech across situations/people. In addition to the blank form, we've included an example.

Getting to Know Me Form and Example
This form includes a basic explanation of SM and space for you to provide specific information about your child and their strengths and weaknesses. Included is a blank form to be filled in by a parent/caregiver that can be shared with individuals working with your child and an example of a completed form.

Quick Tips for Successful Communication

With this document, we have attempted to create a one-page tip sheet to help engage children with SM in a way that will reduce anxiety and create a relaxed setting for speech to occur more naturally. It can be shared with all school personnel, even those who rarely come into contact with your child in the school setting.



During the meeting, it is also important that the school identify the primary interventionist, or "keyworker." The keyworker is the individual in the school setting who will be responsible for the brave work intervention, data collection on progress, generalizing speech to other adults and peers, and communicating with parents, the outside psychologist (if there is one), and other school staff. In most scenarios, the keyworker is either the speech pathologist, school psychologist, social worker, or guidance counselor, because they have a background and/or training with children who have emotional needs (such as anxiety) or speech respond better and make weaknesses. However, parents should also be open to others as keyworkers in the school setting if (1) the noted individuals do not have enough time to see the child with necessary frequency – we recommend 2 to 3 times per week for 15 to 30 minutes, (2) their personalities do not mesh well with the child's temperament, or (3) the noted staff members are not motivated to learn about or engage with a child with selective mutism. Good keyworkers may even include para-professionals, resource room teachers, special education teachers, school nurses, or parents. Because we recommend at least one hour of individualized intervention per week, we typically advise against the child's primary teacher taking on the role of keyworker. Teachers are so busy, they have so much to do in so little time, that we are wary of assigning them this additional responsibility.

At the end of the meeting, parents must be in agreement with services provided, service providers identified, and goals written in order for the intervention to begin. When parents are in agreement and sign the IEP document, the services and accommodations will begin immediately.

-
PARENT POINTER
if the parent/caregiver is able, and the school allows it, they may play an active part in helping their child overcome SM in the school setting, even acting as the keyworker.

Some children will respond better and make progress more quickly when a parent/caregiver is present while other children will find it more difficult when a parent is involved. You should have a good sense for which of these scenarios will work best for your family.

PARENT POINTER
Bring treats to the meeting. 
No kidding - delicious treats will go a long way in creating a softer environment.




A few Strong Recommendations for Meetings:

1. Be respectful and easy to work with. Parents must first advocate for their child's needs, but being perceived as a bully is rarely the best way to obtain services. environment! 
2. Take notes at all meetings and keep all correspondence with the school. Even if you have the kindest principal or special education director in the country, and they are happily providing your child with all the love, support, and intervention you request, they could be replaced with someone who is less inclined to provide services. At that point, you would need documentation. We provide several helpful sheets at the end of this chapter to help you stay organized during the IEP meeting and beyond.

PARENT POINTER
Don't forget to add all correspondence, forms, notes and handouts, from the meeting, to your binder or electronic filing system.

HELPFUL HANDOUT
Services/ Accommodations Goal Tracking Form and example

An example tracking form to verify that services are being regularly performed and are "successful" in making progress toward increased speech with new communication partners and in new locations.



3.

When attending a meeting, it may be helpful to provide informational sheets on SM. We find that the conceptualization of selective mutism handout (Chapter 4) helps school personnel understand the cycle of avoidance and what they can do to help.

4. Provide a short informational sheet about your child's strengths and interests as well as information about their challenges and needs. Additionally, you may wish to provide a short fact sheet on how to best interact with your child to boost communication success. At the end of this chapter we provide a sample "Getting to Know Me" template and example. We also provide a sheet titled, "Quick Tips for Successful Communication".

6 Accommodations/Services Delivered

The goal of school intervention is to increase confidence and speech at school, so that the child is able to engage fully in the classroom (including responding and initiating to teachers and peers, answering questions, doing oral presentations, participating in group projects, etc.). In order for a child to progress along the path to communicating freely in the school setting, they may need special accommodations to coincide with the behavioral intervention "tools" that we discussed in the previous chapter. Regardless of the type of plan your child is participating in, the following accommodations might be considered. This is not an exhaustive list but rather a list of common and helpful accommodations. When determining accommodations for your child, consider those that provide the child with ways to access the full academic and social experience at school.

of
we

d,

to

es

S

Common Accomodations for Children

*

Preschool

Allow child's parents/family members to have access to the school environment during off hours (before/after school, during summer months) to promote comfort and verbalization when alone with a parent and eventually, one or more peers or a teacher
Early arrival to class for warm-up in the morning
A bathroom buddy and scheduled times for restroom breaks
Providing a nonverbal way for the child to indicate that they need to use the restroom, such as a card they flip over on their desk, or verbal prompts from the teacher to stop and use the restroom 
Alerting the child/parent to changes, such as a substitute teacher or a fire drill
Extra time to respond and/or wait time for responses
Interacting by asking choice questions rather than open-ended questions
Communication cards (this should be considered short-term as to not provide an avoidance strategy) 
Reinforce/praise when child engages in appropriate social interactions (privately if child doesn't like attention)
Social stories to increase confidence in how to engage in social interactions
Role-playing opportunities for more anxiety-rpvoking occurrences (e.g., show and tell or class presentations)
Introduction to potential teachers (for the following year) in the spring before school is dismissed Visit to the new classroom prior to the start of the year, at least one week before the start of school 
Child should be encouraged to increase communication/participation in the classroom and in social interactions (even if that communication is nonverbal at first). Eventually, attempts should be made to reinforce and attend to only verbal language, so as to extinguish the use of nonverbal communication.
Information on the student's needs will be conveyed to substitute teachers 

Elementary School

All or some of the example services listed above for preschool
All adults who come into contact with the child should be advised of the intervention plan (e.g., teacher, extras teachers, lunch personnel, office staff, etc.) 
Preferential seating in the front of class (so that children aren't turning around and visibly staring at them when they talk) or next to conversational partners (kids they already speak to)
Alternative communication strategies for oral presentations/group projects, including taping the presentation and showing the teacher or allowing the child to present only to the teacher or a small group of peers
Taping verbal homework at home
Thoughtful peer pairing on group work
Thoughtful class placement (considering both the teacher's interaction style and peer pairing)
Small group testing, extended time for assessments or assessments in a private room
The district will provide faculty training through consultations and attendance at SM conferences, as well as applicable books
Child should not be punished and/or criticized because of the lack of speech
Child will not be held accountable for participation points in class, or will be allowed to demonstrate class participation through other avenues of communication
Home/school communication of brave work and speech practices on a daily or weekly basis
School to provide quarterly parent/faculty meetings to update and report on accommodations and progress
Child will not be called on in class without a plan or permission
Child will be allowed to sit next to preferred peer at lunch
Teachers will check in with the student and confirm whether the student has any questions about the assignment instead of waiting for the student to ask

Middle/High School

All or some of the example services listed above for Elementary School
Student will be able to meet with all teachers during their planning period during first few weeks of school 
Foreign language requirement will be waived
Student will have alternative presentation options (alone with teacher, small group, video or audiotaped, etc.) 
Student will be allowed a private location for changing clothes during physical education class

PARENT POINTER

"Ask not what the school can do for you, but what can you do for the school!" You are asking the school to "do for you" and your child. If you can help the school that will go a long way in ultimately helping your child. In some ways, the school team may need to go out of their way to help your child overcome SM. Help them, help you!

Students who have IEPs are eligible for individualized intervention and they may work with one or more specialists at the school. Parents are encouraged to consider which interventions might be the most helpful for their child. Who would be a good fit therapeutically? Who would be a good fit in terms of personality and time? Common interventionists who can be written into the IEP include:

-

Speech-language pathologist - to increase and/or improve a child's speech and/or carry out behavioral interventions

Social worker to address a child's anxiety through behavioral inter-ventions

-


Educational consultant - to assist students, parents, and teachers in determining a helpful curriculum and guiding the educational experience for a child regarding academic matters

Behavioral analyst - to conduct a functional behavior analysis and help develop a behavioral intervention plan based on a child's specific needs Resource room teacher – to provide a child with individualized attention for academic needs

School psychologist - to address anxiety through behavioral interven- tions and/or consult with other service providers on effective interventions in the school setting

As noted before, private schools are not mandated by law to provide special education services. However, private schools are typically provided with a small amount of federal money each year to develop Instructional Service Plans (ISPs). It is up to the private school to determine what services they can and are willing to provide. Many private schools are willing to assign a keyworker to help children with selective mutism, as long as it is a current staff member. Therefore, parents of children in private schools may need to be more flexible with the staff who might work with their child (think outside of the box!). Parents might consider paying for educational material (books, training manuals, and training videos) for that individual. Hiring a therapist with SM expertise to work with the selected staff member, either remotely or at school, is also an option worth considering.

7 Progress Reviewed

It is important that parents receive regular feedback from the keyworker. What is the child accomplishing, how is the child progressing, and how frequently is the intervention taking place? You might consider having a three-ring binder that can be passed back and forth between parents, teachers, the keyworker, other interventionists and the outside psychologist. This way, every team member knows what others are working on, parents can appropriately reinforce and reward brave behavior at home for what occurred at school, and the team can more comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention. Other ways communicating can also be effective, such as a shared online document or regular emails to the team. Frequent team meetings (in person or via phone call), may also be helpful to update progress, maintain gains, and develop new short-term goals.

8 Needs Re-evaluated

IEPs, Section 504 Plans, and unofficial accommodation plans are typically updated yearly in order to determine effectiveness of the intervention and develop new short and long-term goals. These progress meetings also provide an opportunity to discuss how the child is doing and what changes need to be made at school and at home. Again, parents have the right to bring outside individuals to these meetings, including therapists or other caregivers.

Every three years, it is required that the school fully re-evaluate children with IEPs to determine if they still meet the criteria to receive services.

Thankfully, many children with SM improve so much after effective intervention that there will come a point at which they no longer need (or qualify for) services. This is a great outcome, and it is important that parents do not fear reaching it! A formal IEP may no longer be needed when the child is able to fully engage in the classroom demands, including doing oral presentations, speaking to teachers, answering questions, talking to peers, and advocating for themselves when they are hurt, confused, ill, and/or in need of help. They may not be a social butterfly or the most outgoing child in their class, but they are progressing as expected at school. It may still be important for them to have a few specific accommodations, including a well-chosen teacher, seeing the classroom and meeting the teacher before the beginning of the school year. They may also continue to require a little extra time to answer questions and careful consideration of alternative public speaking opportunities. However, most of these can be negotiated with the school without having a formal IEP in place.

Some schools may feel "burdened" by IEPs because they are under federal mandate to provide individualized services to many students with diverse needs. For this reason, it may be in the "best interest" of the school to close out an IEP if they do not perceive a child to be significantly behind academically or socially, and parents may find themselves being encouraged to sign off. If you feel as though ending the IEP might put your child at risk of losing important and necessary services and/or accommodations, continue to advocate for your child. It will be important for parents to demonstrate how SM continues to impact their child at school, even if they've made some progress. On the other hand, many parents aren't ready to let go of the IEP "security blanket" even though their child s perfectly capable of carrying on quite well without an IEP. In both situations outlined above, a 504 Plan may be a great fit. It still provides accommodations and some special assistance for your child but it is much less formal.


What if the school isn't meeting your child's needs?

Contact an educational advocate. An advocate will help you understand your rights and how to advocate for services. They typically work directly with the school on your behalf. Advocates can be found via referrals or by searching "educational advocate (your state)." Most advocates are paid, but some provide free or low-cost services for families.

Request an Independent Educational Evaluation (IEE). Parents who are uncomfortable or in disagreement with the school's findings during the evaluation may request an Independent Educational Evaluation (IEE), where the evaluation is conducted by an outside psychologist (not associated with the school) to provide a second opinion. The fee for the IEE is typically covered by the school district.

Request mediation. The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that schools provide mediation for free, upon request. A mediator is a neutral professional who works with parents and the school to find a solution. The mediator typically meets with the parents and the school at the school office and works to bring the two sides to an agreement. Because this is a formal process under IDEA law, the decision at the end of mediation is legally binding for both parties.

Consult with an attorney. The attorney may have additional special education law knowledge and may be able to assist with next steps. They might suggest a due process complaint, which is a semi-formal hearing with an impartial hearing officer who decides if your child is eligible for services. Due process complaints can be complex legal procedures, so it is recommended that parents do not take this step without trying all other means first.

What is a parent's role in the school intervention?

Many parents wonder how much they should be involved in the intervention taking place at the school. There is no one size fits all answer for this; a family must take several things into consideration.

1. How old is the child? The older the child, the less the parent should be involved.

2. Does the child speak to any adults in the school already? If the child already speaks to a few people at school, the parent may need to be less involved. If the child will not speak to anyone except parents in school, they may need to assist at the start of the intervention to transfer speech to the keyworker or teacher.

3. Is the school team engaged and consistently providing services? Parents should be involved in the creation of the intervention plan, well as tracking how frequently the intervention is occurring and how "successful" the intervention appears to be. If the school is unable or unwilling to provide intervention services regularly or the child seems to be making little progress, parents may need to consider providing some of the intervention themselves (assuming the school will allow for this), such as helping to extend speech to new communication partners and to new locations at school and helping to set goals for the child
. 
The most important role for parents to play is that of cheerleader! As the cheerleader you are your child's most fierce advocate and their number one fan! You will also need to make sure that services are being consistently implemented in school, track data on effectiveness, and help communicate between the school and outside therapy services. If you, as a parent, have social anxiety or an introverted personality, it may be hard to engage in all of these roles. Seek out support for yourself, whether it is a friend or family member who can attend meetings with you, or a therapist of your own to increase confidence and decrease anxiety.

Providing your child with an ideal learning environment is no easy task. The handouts, worksheets, and examples that we provide should assist you with this process and save you time. They will not magically transform your child's educational experience, but they will help the school team to better understand selective mutism and what they can do to help your child!

eir com
s who a

from ou If they

ations discon

ding e speak

ention

O coug

ense d is dec

so it is

n com

words o deb

eak ou strati che la

ked

w of

gnos

ore

IEP Eligibility Category Request Form

Name

Disability Category:

The following disability categories are the most common for children working to overcome selective mutism.

Speech/Language Impairment (SLI)

Defined as a communication disorder which adversely affects a child's learning. A language disorder "may be characterized by difficulty in understanding and producing language, including word meanings (semantics), the components of words (morphology), the components of sentences (syntax), or the conventions of conversation (pragmatics)" (Head Start, 2006). Children with Selective Mutism may have primary disabilities in speech (including semantics, articulation, and fluency), but also have social pragmatic speech weaknesses (the ability to utilize speech effectively in social situations). 
Other Health Impairment (OHI)

Defined as a child who has a chronic or acute health condition which limits alertness in the educational environment due to either limited strength, vitality, and alertness or heightened alertness to the surrounding environment; these must impair academic performance (Grice, 2002).

Emotional Disturbance/Disability (ED)

Defined as a child whose education is impacted by one or more of the following emotional or behavioral issues:

A. An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual, sensory, or health factors. 
B. An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and teachers.

C. Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal circumstances.

D. A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression.

E. A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school problems.

Notes:


Caregiver Note: The category for eligibility will typically be chosen by the team deciding eligibility. If you disagree with the category selected, you may request that another category be chosen. Most children with SM will fit nicely into the Speech/Language Impairment category or the Other Health Impaired category.


ol
you

with

gory.

1

ors.

autism.

y),

Consideration of Special Education Services
IEP Request Letter

Everything between the brackets should be customized. Be sure to edit content in order to reflect your child's specific situation. Send a copy to the principal/special education director of the program and keep a copy for yourself.


[Date]

[Special Education Director Name or Principal's Name]

[Address]

[City, State, Zip Code]

Dear [Special Education Director's Name or Principal's Name]:

program and

My child, [child's name], is currently in list program or grade] at [school name]. Given a recent diagnosis of selective mutism, a specific anxiety disorder, I would like my child to be evaluated for special education services. I would also appreciate the chance to meet with the special education team to discuss [his/her] current placement situation and to look at how we can modify [his/her] current goals and objectives to better fit [his/her] educational needs.

[Edit this paragraph to reflect your specific situation] Despite attempts to increase speech in the school setting, my child continues to struggle with significant anxiety which impacts [his/her] ability to focus, learn, and fully participate in the academic setting. [He/She] cannot participate verbally in the classroom, and therefore is not able to do oral presentations, group projects, paired activities, etc. Additionally, [he/she] cannot alert the teacher if [he/she] doesn't understand, needs help, or is hurt/sick.

Research demonstrates that children with selective mutism are very successful when they have specific intervention and accommodation plans in the school setting. This includes identifying and working with a specific individual "keyworker" who can help the child practice "being brave" and encourage speech with multiple individuals in new environments.

Please schedule a meeting as soon as possible so that we can discuss these issues and consider appropriate interventions and accommodations. I would prefer being contacted with time options in advance so that a team meeting can be scheduled at a mutually agreeable time and place. I understand that the school has 45 school days to evaluate my child and hold the eligibility meeting.

I look forward to hearing from you soon and working together to help [child's name].

Sincerely,

[Parent/Guardian Name] [Address]

[City, State, Zip Code] [Phone Number]


IEP Meeting Notes

Name      			Grade/Age 			Date


SCHOOL TEAM INFORMATION:		

Attendees:




NOTES:



FOLLOW-UP: 
My to-do list:
School team to-do list:


Assigned Keyworker:

Next Meeting Date:



IEP Goal Planning Example 

Goal Tooling/ leob
Name 				Grade/Age  2nd/7	Date 9/15/18


Annual Goal #: 3


Goals should be specific, easily measurable, realistic, relevant, assessable, and given a specific end date. 

Student will speak in a full voice with the general education teacher in the general education classroom by June of 2019.

Short Term Objectives:

Short term objectives help track progress toward the annual goal. They may be viewed as checkpoints.

1. By November, when asked a forced-choice question by the teacher in private, student will respond verbally with 90% consistency

2. By January, when asked a forced-choice question by the teacher in a small-group activity, student will respond with 90% consistency

3. By March, when asked an open-ended question by the teacher in a small-group setting, student will answer with 90% consistency

4. By May, when asked either a forced-choice or open-ended question by the teacher in the classroom setting, student will respond with 90% consistency 

Classroom Accommodations:

What accommodations will be necessary to achieve this goal?

Preferential Seating
One-on-one brave work practice with teacher
Advanced notice and role playing for speech prompts 
Carefully-chosen peer groups for group work



SPECIAL SERVICES (OT, SLP, ETC.):

Will special services be required to achieve this goal? Check all that apply.

Speech language pathologist (to increase and/or improve my child's speech and/or carry out behavioral interventions)
Social worker (to address my child's anxiety through behavioral interventions)
Educational consultant (to assist in creating a helpful curriculum or educational experience for my child) Behavioral analyst (to conduct a functional behavior analysis and help develop a behavioral intervention plan based on my child's specific needs)
Resource room teacher (to provide my child with individualized attention for academic needs)
School Psychologist (to address anxiety through behavioral interventions and/or consult with other service providers on effective interventions in the school setting)
Other:

Notes:

It will be important for the teacher to develop a positive rapport with the student first
Student really enjoys questions about dinosaurs - teacher should focus forced-choice questions on this area of interest first 
Teacher will be giving stickers discretely to child for each successful brave practice, to be cashed in at home for prizes 
If student does not answer, teacher will wait 5 seconds and then ask again
School personnel will read books and websites on how to effectively interact with children with Selective Mutism


IEP Goal Planning

Name			Grade/Age			Date


Annual Goal #:




Goals should be specific, easily measurable, realistic, relevant, assessable, and given a specific end date.

Short Term Objectives:
Short term objectives help track progress toward the annual goal. They may be viewed as checkpoints.


Classroom Accommodations:
What accommodations will be necessary to achieve this goal?


SPECIAL SERVICES (OT, SLP, ETC.):
Will special services be required to achieve this goal? Check all that apply.

Speech language pathologist (to increase and/or improve my child's speech and/or carry out behavioral interventions)
Social worker (to address my child's anxiety through behavioral interventions)
Educational consultant (to assist in creating a helpful curriculum or educational experience for my child) 
Behavioral analyst (to conduct a functional behavior analysis and help develop a behavioral intervention plan based on my child's specific needs)
Resource room teacher (to provide my child with individualized attention for academic needs)
School Psychologist (to address anxiety through behavioral interventions and/or consult with other service providers on effective interventions in the school setting)
Other:

Notes:


SW
ific end date.


Services/Accomodations Goal Tracking Example
Name	Bailey Brown			Grade/Age 	2nd/7

Service/Accommodation:

Speech & Language, Mrs. White

Goal:

Student will speak in a full voice with the general education teacher in the general education classroom by June of 2019.





Getting to Know Me! Example
Name 	Diego Garcia 		Grade/Age 	2nd/8 		Date 8/15/19


What is selective mutism (SM)? 
Selective mutism is a childhood anxiety disorder characterized by a child's inability to speak and communicate effectively in select social situations, such as school. Children with SM are able to speak and communicate in settings where they are comfortable, secure, and relaxed (usually with their family at home).


Is selective mutism a matter of discipline? 
Although the word "selective" may seem as though a child has a choice in the matter, SM is

simple as a child being shy or refusing to talk and it is not something for which a child can be "disciplined". They may seem withdrawn or uncomfortable. This is NOT because they are unhappy, purposely ignoring you or trying to get attention. It is because the child is so consumed by anxiety and fear that they cannot speak. They can and WILL speak when the right techniques are employed.

Why do children develop SM?
SM is currently understood as a type of social anxiety and children with SM may have a fear of others hearing their voice. It is believed to have genetic, biological, environmental and temperamental components. It is NOT caused by trauma, abuse, or bad parenting.

SM impacts each child very differently, however some common impacts include: 
Difficulty speaking in the school environment 
Inability to make eye contact, awkward/stiff body language, non-verbal communication, etc. Situational avoidance in speaking with neighbors, unfamiliar adults and children, and even some relatives outside of the immediate family
Struggling to speak in environments and with people where there is a history of avoidance Difficulty in starting new activities and meeting new people


About Me:

My name is Diego and I enjoy all things SHARK! I love Star Wars and playing with my little brother too. I recently started building a big Lego set and I can't wait to finish it. I'm really quiet at school but I'm not at all shy. I have two friends on my street that I speak with at home and we can get quite rambunctious together!

I am Overcoming Selective Mutism:

I DO speak (and a lot) when I feel comfortable with my surroundings. I enjoy the company of my peers and I am able to speak comfortably with most children. However, I still have great difficulty speaking with adults. It is essential that you provide me with ample and appropriate opportunities to use my voice particularly during our first interactions so that I don't get too comfortable staying silent.

Important Notes:

I understand that all people have challenges that they work to overcome and that every child is "working" on something. I know that my challenge is using my voice in some situations.

While I am aware that I have to work hard to speak, I am unaware and unfamiliar with the term selective mutism. Please do not question me as to why I don't speak and don't punish me for not speaking.

When I do speak to you, roll with it and do NOT draw attention, act surprised, or praise me. This could embarrass me and cause a set back.

I may not ask when I need help.

PRIVATE: DO NOT SHARE WITHOUT PERMISSION

Learn more about selective mutism: 
selectivemutism.org 
childmind.org 
selectivemutismlearning.org


Quick Tips for Successful Communication 
Decreasing anxiety and creating a relaxed setting for a child to speak

TO BEGIN (Warm-up):

Make one sided conversation like a "sportscaster" and AVOID asking questions. Speak by making statements that do not require "answers".

AFTER the Warm-up:

Speak normally, asking "forced- choice" questions that require a brief answer, and pause for a response, if necessary. Allow for hesitation (at least 5 seconds).

If there is no response, please repeat the question. Don't act disappointed or anxious if there is no response. Allow for hesitation (at least 5 seconds).

If there is still no answer, reframe the question into a yes or no question so that it can be answered non-verbally. Move back into sports casting and try a forced choice question again later.

1

2

3

4

EXAMPLES:
1.

I love how you are coloring your princess pink. Oh, look at that, you added a nice castle for your princess.

I brought my lunch today and I can't wait to eat my bologna sandwich and pretzels!

EXAMPLES:
2.

Would you like to use blue, purple or another color for your project?

Did you bring your lunch or are you buying lunch today?

3. 
Would you like to use blue, purple or another color for your project?

Did you bring your lunch or are you buying lunch today?
4. 
Would you like purple? Yes or No?

Did you bring your lunch today? Yes or No?


POINTERS:
1
Avoid Yes/No questions because they can lead to head nodding and the child should be encouraged to use their voice.
2
Teachers should gradually structure interactions in a way that fosters verbalization rather than nonverbal communication.

"I see you shaking your head but I'd like you to use your voice."

4
Do not forget to allow at least 5 seconds for the child to respond.

If these steps don't work, check in with the child's parents/therapist for next steps.


ESSENTIAL Reminders:

Please do NOT avoid interacting with children who have SM, but do avoid asking questions at first. 
Do NOT ask them why they don't speak or try to make them speak. Both of these tactics can increase anxiety and can ultimately delay speech.

If others ask why they don't speak (OR why they whisper), please correct them and let them know that they do speak (speak louder) when they are ready. Especially important if they ask in front of the child! 
Teachers should redirect when peers speak for the child (this may accidentally rescue the child from communicating). Teachers may consider pulling the child with SM aside to ask privately what they need in order to get direct speech or communication. If the child is unable to speak to you directly, check with parents/therapist to determine if it is acceptable for the child to use a peer as a "verbal intermediary".

When they DO speak, please DO NOT act surprised or overly excited when they do speak might cause the child to withdraw.

