Chapter Seven
CONQUERING CHALLENGES: PRACTICE, REINFORCE, REPEAT

Central to overcoming selective mutism is developing an overall plan that will slowly help your child reach increasingly difficult goals. When thinking about which pathways to focus on, consider the situations in which your child struggles. Do they struggle in specific environments, with certain people or when certain expectations are placed on their speech? In this chapter, we present a series of handouts and examples to help you better focus your efforts to create a tailored plan for your child. We offer examples of how to complete each handout, but we encourage you to use the blank copies at the end of the chapter as you carefully consider your child's individual goals. The older and more mature your child is, the more you may wish to involve them in the planning process (being careful not to overwhelm them). It's time to reach for the top of Peers Peak, School Summit, Community Crest, and Mount Mindful! Practice, reinforce, repeat... As you start planning challenge pathways for/with your child, consider that each pathway will provide a step-wise approach to meeting a specific milestone. Begin to think about situations you would like to help your child conquer, and which steps they will need to accomplish in order to reach the end of a particular pathway. We list several common challenges in our example of the Goal Mapping worksheet but these are just a handful of the many challenges that children with SM might be working to overcome. Are these challenges relevant for your child?

It is also important to explore Pathway Hazards, or factors that may influence your child's progress while planning. In chapter 3 we introduced the Pathway Hazards - (1) the audience, (2) the environment and (3) the speech demand. In chapter 4 we asked you to consider which factors influence your child's ability to speak and communicate. When considering which challenge your may be ready to take on, think about these factors as they might be helpful in determining the appropriate order of steps to reach important goals.

Reflect back on the Cataloguing Current Speaking Abilities and Challenges worksheet from chapter 4 (if you had a chance to complete it) and ask yourself the following questions:

HELPFUL HANDOUT

Goal Mapping Worksheet 
This may be helpful for considering which goals your child may need to work toward.



peak

group


How can my child grow in the number of people with whom they speak? Who might we add on as a communication partner? Are they novel or known to the child? Will they practice private responses, small responding, or speaking with a larger/public audience?
How can my child increase the number of places where they speak? Are there any environments that are particularly difficult for your child? Do environmental stimuli impact their speech (e.g. crowded and noisy vs quiet)? 
How can my child increase in their verbalization? Do they need to use a  louder voice? Should they be working on longer answers? Do they seem to have more trouble initiating or responding to speech?

Now that you have identified several goals/challenges for your child, begin to think about which goals might be the most attainable. The Challenge Pathway Planning worksheet provides space for planning appropriate steps to reach anintended goal. Notice that we include space for you to consider Pathway Hazards on this worksheet so that it will be easier for you to think through possible steps to help your child meet their goal. Perhaps it's easier for your child to speak in a quiet and less chaotic environment rather than a crowded environment or maybe it's easier to speak with girls and women than with boys or men. Use that knowledge plan slow, consistent steps and carefully consider these factors when planning pathways so that you are creating opportunities for success.


HELPFUL HANDOUTS

Challenge Pathway Planning

Encourages parents to plan slow, consistent steps toward a speaking goal. 



The Field Map

Peers Peak

School Summit

Community Crest

Mount Mindful

Challenge Pathway

Victory Valley

Foundational Foothills

Goal Mapping Example
Determining Goals - Which situations are challenging for your child? 

Use the open space below to list challenging situations that your child faces with peers, at school, and in the community. Which Mount Mindful skills might be important to explore? 

Peers Peak
Participating in small group conversations 
Talking on the phone to friends 
Speaking with peers at extracurricular activities
Speaking at playdates at home
Responding to peers at a public playground

School Summit
Speaking to a friend one on one
Answering the teacher 
Asking the teacher for help 
Presenting in front of the class Speaking with specials teachers 
Speaking in small groups

Community Crest
Asking for a free sample at the grocery 
Ordering at a restaurant 
Responding to healthcare workers 
Speaking to coaches
Responding when approached unexpectedly 
Speaking with extended family members

Mount Mindful
The more you do, the more you can do (small steps = big accomplishments) 
Comfort with being uncomfortable 
Perfection is a problem 
Staying with challenges - grit

*This is not an exhaustive list of challenges faced by children with SM. These are examples to help you formulate a plan for your child

Notes:
Challenge Pathway Exampl 
Responding to peers at a public playground...

Child is prompted to ask the peer a scripted question
Example: "Why don't you ask our friend, how old are you?”

Parent continues to prompt the peer to ask questions 
Example: "Can you ask my daughter how old she is?”

Parent prompts the peer to ask the child a forced-choice question
Example: "My daughter has a favorite slide too, can you ask her if she likes the big or the small slide?"

Parent engages the peer
Example: "Do you like the big slide or the small slide?"

Adult prompts for speech within earshot of the peer
Example: "Do you want to go on the big slide or the small slide?"

Adult speaks to another child (a peer) in order to bring them into the interaction 
Example: Parent notices a peer playing by the slide and moves with child near the slide

Adult encourages the child to be comfortable and verbal (with them) at the playground 
Example: Parent plays with child on the swings and might ask the child how fast they want to swing


Which Factors might influence progress?

THE AUDIENCE

•This interaction should be private with no other adults present (could make it harder)
• It's best if the peer is a girl

THE ENVIRONMENT 
We should go to Liberty Park because it tends to be quiet
It's best if it's not too cold when we do the challenge

THE SPEECH DEMAND 
Start with forced-choice question and then move on to basic questions with one word answer
If she whispers, that's ok. We can work on volume later.


Notes

I need to remember that every child progresses at a different pace. She may be able to move through all of these steps in one interaction, or she may be practicing a specific step over a longer period of time. Steps may need to be adjusted or re-ordered. I won't know until we try!
If peers ask why she doesn't talk, or if she freezes, I should say, "She speaks when she is comfortable, and she is practic-ing speaking to new friends. Sometimes learning new things takes time!"


There are many strategies for advancing a child's comfort with speaking confidently in new
places and with new people. Fundamental to each strategy slightly higher than your child's current comfort level, while being careful not to change too many factors at once. Establishing appropriate steps, goals and expectations for your child's brave work is perhaps the most important aspect in making it easier for your child to overcome a challenge.

could only practicing frequently but seeking out activities and demands that are
ostal 1989 luttongm

Peers Peak
Conquering Playdates

Playdates are an excellent opportunity for younger children to become verbal with their peers, either at school, home or extracurricular activities. Although planned playdates may seem cumbersome, your child has the potential to make great strides with peer relationships when playdates are carefully planned and occur frequently. Making their way to the top of Peers Peak will require hard work and dedication; your child should be provided many opportunities to flex and stretch their brave muscles!

Dynamics of a Successful Playdate

Planning/ Leadership
Planning and Leadership - A playdate with a new child will require parent/ teacher/therapist involvement to plan and lead the interaction so that the child will have fun, feel successful, and look forward to future get-togethers. The adult should take great care to select appropriate interactive activities that will encourage speaking (arts and crafts, games, cooking, pretend play, kitchen activities, etc.).

Carefully Selected Peers

Carefully Selected Peers - Many times children with SM will seek out playmates who are quick to respond, but that may not be the best choice for a "learning" playdate. Patience is a necessity during these planned encounters. A good choice will be a child who is slightly more mature than their peers, conversationally self-reliant but not "pushy" and who will have the patience to wait for a response from your child.

Relaxed Environment
Relaxed Environment - Choose a familiar, comfortable environment where the child is mostly verbal. That might be at home, the playground, or somewhere else. A new environment may inhibit communication especially if it is a location where the child is accustomed to not speaking. For example, if the child is not verbal in the classroom, do not choose the classroom for a playdate. Perhaps the library or a resource room is more comfortable for your child and would increase the likelihood of success.


Appropriate Expectations
Appropriate Expectations - When planning the playdate, take time to consider the challenge pathway progression. Think through the steps your child might take in order to meet the goal of a particular playdate or challenge. The goal might be to simply play with a peer (nonverbally), respond to a peer at a one-on-one playdate, initiate with a peer during a playdate or participate in a conversation with a group of peers, etc. There are many pathways that children may take while working to conquer "Peers Peak". In most cases, children will have many playdates and conquer many different challenges before it becomes easier and more natural for them to communicate conversationally with peers.

PARENT POINTER

These are new skills for both parents and children and therefore mistakes may happen, and you might not get it exactly right the first time or every time, but both you and your child will become
more skilled with practice.

HELPFUL HANDOUT

Impactful Peer Interactions Worksheet
This worksheet will assist parents in planning and organizing successful playdates with peers. 

Impactful Peer Interactions Example
Conquering Playdates


Peers

Select peers who are patient, well-liked and helpful (ask the teacher to provide a list if necessary). We recommend beginning with one-on-one interactions. Once the child has conquered one-on-one interactions, small group activities might be next.

Jill-Everyone loves Jill, she just loves to be helpful and she seems older than she is. Rebecca-She a social butterfly, she's really smart and she follows directions.

Which peer(s) will take part in this interaction and what should they understand prior to the 
interaction?

Rebecca is a good choice for this interaction. I will tell her that we are ging to play games with Sam during lunch.
I will let her know that Sam likes to talk but she has to feel comfortable first so she might be quiet for a while. I will also warn her not to make a big deal about Sam talking or ask why she doesn't because it might embarrass her. I'll ask Rebecca to just keep playing and talking to her anyway.

Plan
Where will the interaction be?

In the room next to the classroom during lunch. It will be best if there aren't any distractions

What will the children be doing?
They will play "Let's Go Fishing" for warm up because it doesn't require speaking and the kids can have fun with it.
Then we'll play "Pop-Up Pirate".


What will you do to help facilitate?
When the kids play "Let's Go Fishing" I'll be the sportscaster and say things like, "Oh, great job grabbing the orange fish, Sam!" and "Wow, that was quick Rebecca!". When we switch to "Pop-Up Pirate", let both kids know that when they put their sword into the barrel, they should say the color of the sword. I'll be prepared to wait five seconds for Sam to say the color, but if she doesn't, I'll ask, "Is that the red sword or the blue sword?"

Outcome & Notes

What worked well? Does anything need to be adjusted for the next interaction? Any breakthroughs? 

Let's Go Fishing was fun! Sam was apprehensive but whispered "Blue" in front of Rebecca! I didn't prompt her to say it louder but next time, I will do that. I think I'd like to do this type of activity a few more times (this week and next) with some of her other peers and see if we can get Sam to increase her volume and then perhaps use more than one word when she responds.

Breakthrough-whispering with a peer present!!


School Summit
Making communication gains at school

The school setting can present a myriad of challenges for children with SM. School can be a perfect storm of anxiety- social stress, the desire to be perfect, unpredictable schedules, and many novel adults. While it's important to address anxiety in the school setting, it can be difficult to do so for a variety of reasons (addressed in chapter 6). Even though school is typically the location where children struggle the most, parents and teachers can set up strategic challenges to help children face their fears in slow, steady steps. In this section, we include an example challenge pathway highlighting the steps to reach a higher-level goal in the school setting (Presenting in front of the class). We encourage you to use the provided in chapter 6 as you plan for speech success at school.

resources

Presenting in Front of the Class
Challenge Pathway Example

6
Child completes the presentation in same manner as her peers. 
Example: Child performs her presentation in front of the class, in random order, with minimal reference to notecards and with questions at the end.

5
With careful planning, the child performs the same presentation in front of her class. 
Example: The child will do her presentation in front of the class but the order will be carefully determined ahead of time and she will be allowed to read from notecards if she wishes. No follow up questions will be asked.

4
Child performs the same presentation in front of the teacher and a few chosen peers. 
Example: During lunch, the child, the teacher, and 3 friends meet and the child does the presentation.

3
Child performs the same presentation in front of the teacher privately. 
Example: Child stays after school and does the presentation for the teacher

2
Child watches the presentation video with the teacher, and the teacher comments on the presentation. 
Example: Child and teacher watch the presentation together and the teacher comments, "I like how you described the difference between slate and volcanic rock."

1
Child videotapes the presentation and allows the teacher to watch it privately. 
Example: Parent videotapes the child's science project presentation.


Community Crest 
Practicing in the community

To set goals and objectives for community brave ork, it is important that once again we keep in mind the three factors that determine difficulty level: 1) audience, 2) the environment, and 3) the speech demand. Planned, scripted speech in public situations is much easier than unexpected, spontaneous interactions. Parents are encouraged to consider which public activities or errands could be adapted to serve as possible brave work opportunities. For example, does your family need to go to the post office to get stamps? Depending on your child's level of speech, perhaps they could:

Wave and/or smile at the employee (nonverbal gesture)
Hand over money or credit card (nonverbal interaction)
Answer how many stamps you need (one-word, concrete, scripted response 
Answer what you need and how many (multiple word scripted response, such as "I need 6 stamps")
Add in polite words, including please and thank you
Verbally handle the entire interaction with the employee, with the parents scripting prior to the interaction what the child will need to ask, such as "Do you have any flower stamps" as well as help the child anticipate follow-up questions (scripted initiation)
Approach and handle the entire interaction independently, with no prompting or scripting from the parent (spontaneous initiation)

There are many opportunities for practicing in public, depending on the skil  level, age, and interests of your child. Brave practices might include:
Store scavenger hunt-finding items on a list by asking employees for their location in the store 
Ordering at restaurants
Talking to peers on the playground
Talking at the post office
Asking questions at the pet store or craft store 
Asking for help finding a book at the library Selling something door to door
Responding to employees at do-it-yourself pottery or painting stores



PARENT POINTER
Think about the goal you  are trying to help your child meet and determine a fe ways each week to work toward that goal. Use the challenge pathway worksheets to help track progress toward the current goal. You may also choose to use the brave work log to keep track of daily practices; this can be passed back and forth between the school, home, and the therapist.

HELPFUL HANDOUTS

Brave Work Log
This document is best used when intervention activities and challenge pathways are being completed with several adults. The log will allow interventionists to pass along valuable notes about progress via a shared document (like a google drive document), a folder, or a 3-ring binder. 
Use this document to share information on the frequency, difficulty level, and outcomes of brave work.


questions. These situations are all out of your control! However, you do have control over two things - your expectations of the child's brave work abilities and your prompts for speech or engagement in those situations.

Because of the unplanned and unexpected nature of these interactions, we refer to the people who begin these interactions as "pop-up people." Since "pop-up people" do not know what step your child is working on, parents may the brave work easier by changing the question or prompt, or even prompt away altogether. For example, if a clerk in the checkout line at a store asks your child how old she is, and your child has been practicing answering a one-word question, then this is an appropriate (albeit unplanned) brave work opportunity.

A flowchart of prompts and expected responses for this example might include:
PARENT POINTER

Parents should take time to plan practice outings carefully, making sure the interaction is only a step slightly higher than a previous brave practice.
It is also important to take into account other factors that might make the interaction easier or harder, including how patient the employee at the counter seems, how loud the environment is, or how many people are waiting in line (as a possible audience).

PARENT POINTER

There are internal factors that might impact the child's ability to do brave work. In the same way that we need to be in a certain "shape" to handle a strenuous work-out (eg, rested, energetic, clearheaded, fed), children may have times when they are less able to challenge or push themselves. If your child is overtired, very irritable, hungry, or completely overwhelmed, it may not be the best opportunity for brave work.



Clerk asks an unexpected question:
How old are you?



VERBAL Response
Child: Six

Labeled PRAISE 
Parent: Six. Thanks for letting her know.


NON-VERBAL Response 
Child: Holds up six fingers

Child PROMPTED 
Parent: I see you holding up your fingers, are you six or 16?

VERBAL Response
NO Response


NO Response
Child: Silent, possibly avoiding eye contact

+



WAIT 5 Seconds
Parent: Could you ask if she is six or 16? 
Clerk: Are you six or 16?

WAIT 5 Seconds & Repeat Question 
Parent: Are you six or 16?

NO Response

End on a positive note with a 'win'! 
Pull the child aside to practice/answer (remind them of their goals/rewards and to breathe) OR Direct the child to engage at their current ability level - answer with first sound, hold up fingers, smile, head nod or shake, point, etc. Parent: We are working on brave talking and I'll bet she'll let you know next time!



The same clerk may unexpectedly try to engage your child in a longer discussion. If their goal currently includes only one-word responses, a parent may need to step in and cut the conversation short or rephrase the clerk's questions (e.g., if the clerk asked a question that clearly would necessitate a response longer than one-word, like "Tell me about your summer vacation," the parent may need to rephrase the question to a forced-choice question requiring only a short answer, like "Did we go to the beach or Disney?"). By changing one factor, the speech demand, you are signaling to your child that you are "on their team." You are assisting them in overcoming their challenges in a way that is manageable. You have helped them in taking another step forward where they easily could have felt defeated - you changed the outcome, your child has a small victory, and you've gained their trust!

Some children are so afraid of pop-up people that they will avoid social or public situations where these interactions might occur, especially if they don't have anyone to "rescue" them or answer for them. Helpful strategies to engage your child in these practices (and thereby reduce their anxiety) might include: 

Setting a goal with a generous reward for engaging with pop-up people
Helping your child script and practice common questions that could be asked unexpectedly. These might include how to respond to a compliment and how to respond to typical questions like, "What is your name?", "How old are you?", or "How are you doing?" 
Being ready to make the prompts or questions simpler for your child to answer (e.g., rephrase to a forced-choice question, ask a shorter or simpler question, etc.).

Preparing your child for unexpected speaking encounters will go a long way toward helping them find success in these situations. Ask them questions like, "What might the store clerks ask when we are buying groceries?" and "Who else might sometimes surprise us with questions?" and then practice these scenarios frequently.

HELPFUL HANDOUTS
Pop-up People Challenge and Preparing for Pop-up People practice Worksheets

These will be helpful in preparing for and dressing the challenge of speaking to unexpected adults (pop-up people) in public.

Preparing for Pop-up People Example


Instructions: We recommend that this sheet be completed and practiced (as often as possible) before the "Pop-up People Challenge" worksheet. When children are prepared for speaking, interactions will feel easier. This may be a higher level challenge for some children.


Before the challenge

What situations are challenging?

When someone asks where I go to school.

When someone wants to know my name.

Let's practice what we will say!

Them: Where do you go to school? Me (basic): Westside Elementary. Me (advanced): I go to Westside Elementary.

Them: What's your name? Me (basic): Simon.
Me (advanced): My name is Simon.

TIVE

When someone asks how old I am.

Them: How old are you sweetie? Me (basic): 7

Me (advanced): I'm 7 years old.

When someone asks if I like something.

When someone asks about

my

red hair.

Them: Do you like chocolate chip cookies? Me (basic): Yes.

Me (advanced): Yes. They are good.

Them: Where did you get that pretty red hair? Me (basic): My dad.

Me (advanced): From my dad.

After the challenge

We did it! What was the hardest part?
The hardest part was when people asked me things and I wasn't ready to answer yet.

We did it! What did we learn?
I learned that if I practice, it gets easier.

ore
Is

SELF

Pop-up People Challenge Example

Instructions: Use this page to track successful interactions with "pop-up people" - unexpected verbal interactions that occur in the community setting. After reaching ten successful verbal interactions, caregivers may choose to provide a special prize!


ONE
Grocery store-whispered name to cashier!

TWO
At the park-whispered name to peer and her mom

THREE
Vet office- answered the vet tech when she asked if the dog likes to licks

FOUR
Store - told the clerk the name of her school


FIVE
At School-answered when a parent volunteer asked how old she is



SIX

At the movies - answered when the usher asked if we were excited to see the movie


my

SEVEN

Store-answered when we ran into an acquaintance and she asked about summer plans


EIGHT

Dance studio - answered a dad when he asked if the kids needed to wear tap or ballet shoes

NINE

Hair salon - smiled and said thank you when another stylist came over and complimented her haircut

TEN

Grocery store - answered with her name when the cashier asked and then told him what her sister's name is too!

PARENT POINTER
Some possible factors that might make some people more difficult to speak with than others are gender, how often the child sees/speaks to the person, how well this person's personality matches with your child, and/or the motivation of your child to speak to this person.


Community Crest

Success with important adults

Many children struggle to speak with familiar adults and extended family. Creating a goal list of adults can be helpful to track who we want to have as a communication partner and how we plan to do it. This list may include coaches, family friends, extended family, religious education teachers, etc. If possible, parents should consider the difficulty level when creating the list. If your child is  old enough to understand and willing to take part, include them in creating the steps in the path to speaking with the important people in their lives. They may they might have valuable insight into how hard it might be to speak with certain adults, who prefer to work with first, and who they might prefer to save for later. 

Children may be more challenged by contaminated adults or peers. When a child does not talk to a specific person or in a specific place for a long period. it is increasingly more difficult for the child to speak in that situation or to that person (thus, this person or environment becomes "contaminated"). As an adult, an example that is easy to relate to is moving to a new home, where you intend to greet your new neighbors but become very busy. As weeks and months pass, you become increasingly hesitant to ring their doorbell and introduce yourself, because it is uncomfortable! "Hi, I'm your new neighbor... I moved in two years ago!" Eventually, you resign yourself to never speaking to your neighbor! Your neighbor has become contaminated. 



Contamination is not the "kiss of death." It simply means that these people or environments will be more difficult because there is a long history of silence. For example, a child who did not talk to her Kindergarten teacher for an entire year may require a longer stimulus fading or shaping process to elicit speech with her new teacher. If contamination is a factor, you may wish to wait to tackle those environments, people, or situations, because they will be more easily accomplished once the child has built up their confidence by working toward other brave goals.

If your child states that they will never be able to talk to someone, don't be discouraged. Place them last in the order and reflect, "That person will be a challenge to talk with, and it feels impossible right now, but it may feel easier later. Let's put them at the end of our practice schedule."


Success with Important Adults Example 

Who are the most challenging people to speak with?

Instructions: Discuss the people with whom your child has difficulty speaking and determine a plan for beginning to speak with these "contaminated" people. Be sure to track and reward successful interactions!




What was the MOST difficult part of this challenge? What did we learn?

It is still really hard when anyone acts surprised. We learned that it really does start to feel easier with practice!

TIVE
FUL

HELA

UTS

NDO

Victory Valley
Celebrating Success!

 With Mount Mindful, we illustrated the importance of how small achievements or accomplishments lead to forward momentum and eventually big outcomes. accomplishments. Many parents make fun charts, keep a journal, or create a wall display because tracking achievements (paired with reward charts to track everyday successes) can be especially motivating for many kids.




The Victory Valley handout may be used to keep track of your child's major

HELPFUL HANDOUT
Success with Important Adults

This worksheet helps organize and track progress through important but difficult verbal interactions with known adults.


With each new victory, the child is reminded that they have overcome a situation that made them anxious and fearful. Anxiety's role is to keep us safe by encouraging us to avoid fearful activities. When we face those activities instead, no matter what the outcome, we learn that we are stronger than the fear. This sets off a cascade of momentum for children and may even spread to situations outside of speaking. Celebrate these steps and help your child keep moving forward!

Challenge Pathway 

Challenge Pathway

Challenge Pathway

Challenge Pathway

Peers Peak

School Summit

Community Crest

Mount

Mindful

Peers Peak

School Summit

Community Crest

Mount Mindful

Peers Peak

School Summit

Community Crest

Mount Mindful

Peers Peak

School Summit

Community Crest

Mount Mindful

Create Your

Own Victory

Create Your Own Victory

Create Your

Own Victory


Create Your Own Victory

Create Your

Own Victory


ents nes.
ajor

e a

ack

e a

e by

no

5 off

side

SEL

Victory Valley Instruction Handout

Instructions:

Celebrate great achievements in your child's journey to overcome SM by placing the icons (page left) on the next page, Victory Valley - Celebrate Success Handout. 

These icons may be copied, cut out, and pasted onto the handout. The Victory Valley - Celebrate Success Handout can be used weekly, monthly, or over a period of several months. You may even choose to use this handout for the journey as a whole. Icons might be earned when a new milestone or goal is reached at school, with peers, in the community, or after demonstrating a new Mount Mindful skill. It will be up to each family if and how to use the handout.

Helpful Hints:

Victory Valley will not be right for every family. Some children are reluctant to "own" an achievement after the first success. 
This handout is not a reward system in the traditional sense, it is meant to be an intrinsic motivator. A place where children can visually see all (or some) of their important achievements.
Let your child have fun and make this worksheet their own! Give them ownership and let them take the lead!

Mount Mindful:
My art project wasn't perfect (Not exactly how I wanted it) but I didn't let it run my day.

It's been so hard to talk to Aunt Sophie. It took Me four tries today but I finally did it, I kept trying & I didn't give up!!


Community Crest:
Answered a "Pop-up" pers at Post office 
Said Thank You" to Cashier for the first time!!!


Peers Peak:
Spoke to Alison for the first Time!!!

Challenge Pathway:
Completed Show and fell" Challenge Pathway!

School Summit:
Walked into School ALONE today!!
SEI

Getting Back on Track when Progress Stalls
Re-establishing Forward Momentum


It is such a joy to see a recently anxious, inhibited child acting brave and confident, speaking to new adults, and making new friends - any and all gains are to be cherished! While most gains tend to be permanent and lead to forward momentum, ishtne small regressions can occur. Although it is rare for children to regress back to where they were before intervention, it is not uncommon for progress to stall.

Helping a child overcome selective mutism can be quite challenging and even the most well-intentioned parents (and other adults) will need to be cognizant of potential pathway pitfalls:

Don't reward without success. For example, if a child's brave work goal is to order ice cream and, despite practicing and planning, they simply are not able to order, what do you do as a parent? Do you order the ice cream for them so that they are not sad or to pacify the waiting people in line behind them? No. Parents can either make the prompt easier or stop the practice exercise and try again another time, saying "I know that you tried hard, and we will try again next time."

If your child expects to get ice cream at the parlor, or a piece of cheese at the grocery store, it will seem unfair to suddenly change the rules without warning. Make sure to discuss the new plan with your child, create small and obtainable goals, and be clear about expectations.

Don't mind read. Parents of children with SM may be uniquely attuned to nonverbal cues their child might use to communicate their needs. Kids need for us to reduce our automatic knowledge of what they want, and begin asking them to take responsibility for indicating, even nonverbally, their choices, needs, and desires.
Don't be critical or discouraging with your words. Take great care not to be critical or discouraging, or to say things aloud in front of the child that suggest they are incapable of speaking or carrying through with a task. It is easy for these statements to slip out - when the teacher says that the class will be doing a presentation, the parent blurts out, "Oh, Jack will never be able to do that!" This undermines the child....and kids believe what we say!

Take great care NOT to allow the child to see your anxiety or frustration. This is not about our goals and where we think they should be-it is about their goals and their progress. Success can take time. 
Don't provide escape routes or avoidance techniques. Children with SM may use many tactics to avoid speech as a result of their anxiety. Parents must be aware of these avoidance techniques and work to reduce them. That is not to say that the expectation should immediately be that the child must speak in sentences to get what they want, but that eventually "talking gets the good stuff" (even when talking means one syllable).


PARENT POINTER 
For some activities, it might be better to practice a new step when siblings are left at home. It would be very difficult to deny your child with SM ice cream while others are eating. Likewise, everyone missing out on ice cream is not a great situation. If you attempt to tackle the next step while the rest of the family is with you, parents must be very intentional with expectations so that the child will find success and take part in the reward (especially a reward like ice cream!).




Don't avoid practicing regularly. Not practicing brave talking enough leads directly to... not brave talking. The child must practice frequently and repeatedly to be successful and for those gains to be maintained. 
Don't set the bar too high. Many adults don't realize that what they are asking of the child is too hard and too complex. They ask the child to say "Hi!" to the teacher. This sounds simple, but requires that the child initiate (harder than responding for some children) in front of a group (harder than in private) with a greeting (usually harder than other social interactions for a child with SM). Take care in the goals you set. Careful and thoughtful planning will help determine appropriate goals. 

Don't ask open-ended questions, especially at first. These are questions typically difficult for children with SM to answer. Instead, try to phrase as forced-choice (e.g., "Do you want vanilla or chocolate ice cream?").

Don't bombard the child with questions. Ask a question, wait at least five seconds for the child to respond and if they don't respond, ask the same question again or rephrase the same question.

Don't focus on polite words... yet. Many parents complain that the hardest words for their children to say are polite words such as hi, bye, sorry, thank you, please, and excuse me. Research has not found an answer for this phenomenon, but it is possible that children have “over-practiced" avoiding these words. Parents have attempted over and over to encourage their child to say "Please" or "Thank you" in public, and the child has therefore garnered a lot of practice avoiding saying these phrases. Alternatively, saying these words might feel more intimate or personal. For example, thank you means you have done something for me. Please is asking a favor of someone. I'm sorry implies you have somehow hurt someone else. In the beginning of treatment, parents should not prompt their child to greet new communication partners, say goodbye, or thank them. Parents and children can focus on these at a later point, and until that point, prompting them generally only sets the child up for failure.

Don't focus on having your child use proper names when speaking to friends and family. Children with SM are often hesitant or even unable/unwilling to use proper names, despite knowing the names. Again, this may be due to intimacy expectations (e.g., if I admit to knowing a person's name, then maybe it is harder to continue not speaking). This may need to be a higher-level goal.

Avoid demanding extended eye contact. It is best not to demand that your child make eye contact at first, since many children with SM can become overwhelmed by eye contact (making it more difficult to reach speaking milestones).



Don't let your anxiety get in the way. It is okay for a child to struggle a little, and it has to be okay for them to be a little uncomfortable. As noted  before, individual growth does not come as a result of doing only things that are easy and comfortable. Undeniably, there will be times when you feel stressed or anxious during the process of helping your child reach their goals. The more relaxed, matter of fact, and "unflappable" you can be when they struggle, the better. It is hard watching children struggle, but they need to struggle in order to gain confidence and understand that they are strong enough to handle discomfort. Eventually, the uncomfortable feeling will dissipate and your child will begin to believe that they can handle any situation thrown at them! 



Although rare, when regressions do occur, many times they cannot be linked to anything specific. Parents, therapists, and the school team should be careful not to blame themselves, but simply make plans to modify the intervention to get progress back on track. First, if the regression can be tracked back to one of the above reasons, or another clear reason, the team should problem-solve how to avoid this regression in the future. Second, we must help the child start again at a reasonable point and feel successful. Goals should revert back to the last step that the child was able to accomplish with only a slight amount of discomfort, and the reward system should reflect this (thus, the expectations are shifted to reflect a slightly easier step/goal and the child is again being rewarded for their brave work). Once the child is reliably accomplishing the easier step, parents and the school should attempt to again move the child to the next step on their "Challenge Pathway".

The Most Common Reasons for Regression and Stalling Include:

A lack of consistent practice being brave
 A new school year, move to a new school, or a new teacher
 Perceived negative feedback (e.g., the child spoke in class and was reprimanded by the teacher harshly)
Social stresses (e.g., the child is having negative interactions with peers in the classroom or neighborhood)
Physical changes (e.g., diet, sleep, hormones, puberty, etc.)
Changes at home
Expectations and demands that are out of sync with ability (Pathway Hazards: audience, environment, and speech demand)

Many children with SM will benefit from and make gains with the help of a local therapist, their school and/or parents who are informed and motivated to follow expert advice (and this book), but there are times when the child simply doesn't improve. If this is your situation, we suggest that you put more thought into intensive intervention options or a consultation with a highly regarded SM treating professional (discussed in Chapter 4).

Goal Mapping
Determining Goals - Which situations are challenging for your child? 

Use the open space below to list challenging situations that your child faces with peers, at school, and in the community. Which Mount Mindful skills might be important to explore? 


Notes:

Peers Peak

School Summit

Community Crest

Mount Mindful

Challenge Pathway Planning 

Which factors might influence progress?

THE AUDIENCE

THE ENVIRONMENT

THE SPEECH DEMAND

Notes





Impactful Peer Interactions 
Conquering Playdates

Peers

Select peers who are patient, well-liked and helpful (ask the teacher to provide a list if necessary). We recommend beginning with one-on-one interactions. Once the child has conquered one-on-one interactions, small group activities might be next.



Which peer(s) will take part in this interaction and what should they understand prior to the interaction?



Plan

Where will the interaction be?

What will the children be doing?

What will you do to help facilitate?

Outcome & Notes

What worked well? Does anything need to be adjusted for the next interaction? Any breakthroughs?



Preparing for Pop-up 

Instructions: We recommend that this sheet be completed and practiced (as often as possible) before the "Pop-up People Challenge" worksheet. When children are prepared for speaking, interactions will feel easier. This may be a higher level challenge for some children.


Before the challenge

What situations are challenging?

Let's practice what we will say!



After the challenge 
We did it! What was the hardest part?

We did it! What did we learn?


Pop-up People Challenge 

Instructions: Use this page to track successful interactions with "pop-up people" - unexpected verbal interactions that occur in the community setting. After reaching ten successful verbal interactions, caregivers may choose to provide a special prize!

ONE


THREE



FIVE



SEVEN

NINE

TWO

FOUR

SIX

EIGHT

TEN



Success with Important Adults

Who are the most challenging people to speak with?

ognia nos

Instructions: Discuss the people with whom your child has difficulty speaking and determine a plan for beginning to speak with these "contaminated" people. Be sure to track and reward successful interactions!

Who

Plan for Speaking

I did it!

+

What was the MOST difficult part of this challenge? What did we learn?

Person Bingo

Instructions: Use the game cards provided on the next page or get creative in the spaces below. This game will help your child get comfortable asking basic questions of community members with a fun objective. After your child checks off four in a row, you may wish to provide a small prize! Community members might include shopkeepers, patrons, restaurant staff, post office employees, etc.




Person Bingo Game Cards 
...eyse yevue ar 
Instructions: The game cards provided here may be written (or cut/pasted) onto the Person Bingo worksheet. There are three question sets provided below.

Bingo Game Card Sets
1.
Find someone who has a sister.

Find someone whose favorite season is Fall.

Find someone who likes brownies or cake.

Ask a person with a short haircut if they like to watch TV.


Find someone who has a pet fish.

Find someone who likes to play tennis.

Find someone who has a birthday in March.

Find someone who has seen The Wizard of Oz.


Find someone who has traveled to another country. 
Ask a store clerk if they like the color blue.
Find someone who has visited the zoo.
Find someone who likes to listen to country music. 

Find someone who likes to take naps.
Find someone who has traveled on a train.
Ask a person with a necklace if they have ever kayaked. 
Find a person whose favorite color is green.



2
Find someone who was born in May.

Ask a person with brown hair about their favorite color.

Find someone who has a pet dog.

Find someone who likes to ride bikes.


Find someone who was has visited New York.

Find someone who likes strawberries.

Find someone who has a pet cat.

Find someone who has seen cartoons.


Ask someone wearing glasses if they like salad. 
Ask a store clerk how long they have worked at the store.
Find someone in a hat and ask if they like baseball. 
Find a person who is younger than 30 and ask their age. 

Find someone who uses Facebook.
Ask someone which holiday is their favorite.
Ask someone where you can find the restroom.
Find someone whose name begins with the letter "A".


3
Find someone who was born in the Fall.

Find someone who likes classical music.

Find someone who has been to college.

Find someone whose favorite color is purple or pink.



Find someone who likes to watch movies.
Find someone with blond hair and ask if they have a sister.
Ask a person wearing a dress if they like spaghetti.
Find someone who likes to sew or knit.

Find someone who has a pet hamster/gerbil.

Find someone who likes to drink coffee.

Find someone who likes to go camping.

Find someone who has served in the military.


Ask a store clerk if this is their first job.

Find someone who likes to go bowling.

Find someone born in a state that starts with the letter "N".

Find someone whose name starts with the letter "M".


And the Survey Says... 
Instructions: Choose four questions from the Example Survey Questions (next page) that your child can ask to 10 adults and/or children. When appropriate, caregivers may choose to offer a prize (perhaps only after one or two interactions or when the survey is complete, depending on skill level).

Survey Questions

Participant Responses

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10



Example Survey Questions

Instructions: The questions provided here may be written (or cut/pasted) onto the 
And the Survey Says... worksheet.

Survey Question Sets

1

What is your favorite food?

Do you like cookies or cake better?

What is your favorite candy?

Do you like water, milk, or juice better?

#

2

What is your favorite movie?

What is your favorite song?

Do you like to watch cartoons?

What is your favorite book to read?

3. 
What is your favorite kind of ice cream?
Do you like sprinkles, nuts or candy on top?
Do you like fudge, caramel or no sauce on top?
Where is your favorite place to get ice cream?




4

What is your name?

How many siblings do you have?

In what state were you born?

In what month were you born?

5


What is your favorite sport?

Do you play any sports?
Do you have a favorite team?

Who is your favorite player?


6

Where do you like to travel?

Do you prefer to travel by car or plane?
Do you like cold places or warm places?
What is your favorite souvenir from your travels?


7

What is your favorite animal?
Do you have any pets?
Do you like big dogs or small dogs better?
What is the scariest animal or insect you have touched?


8

What is your favorite color?
Do you like to take photographs?
Do you have a favorite piece of art?
Have you ever made a sculpture out of clay?



9

What is your favorite state?
Have you been to any other countries?
To which country would you most like to travel?
Which country has the best food?

10

What is your favorite subject in school?
Do you bring your lunch or eat from the cafeteria?
Who is your favorite teacher?
Which country has the best food?

11

Can you name a type of snake?
Can you name a type of shark?
Can you name a type of ant?
Can you name a type of bird?

12

What do you like best about the outdoors?
Do you like to go camping?
Have you ever been swimming in a lake?
Do you like to go bike riding?
Brave Work Log
Instructions: The Brave Work Log is a place to track every attempt by the child to meet a specific challenge or goal at school, therapy, home, etc. This log may be passed back and forth between parents and members of the child's care team, OR each party responsible for intervention activities may have a separate copy of this log sheet.

DATE

Challenge/Step

Notes/Comments


Audience Who was involved?

Environment Where did the intervention happen?

Speech Demand How did the child interact?



