Appendix
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT SELECTIVE MUTISM

Question: How do I explain SM to family/friends or the general public? 
Answer: Spreading awareness about selective mutism is incredibly important.

It will increase empathy for your child's anxiety
It will increase the likelihood that adults and peers are willing to help intervene 
It may help others identify children with SM who would have otherwise just been considered shy or stubborn

Providing information to family, friends, schools, extracurricular coaches, and pediatricians is vital, but is best done in small doses. Parents can give a short explanation outlining SM as an anxiety disorder that makes it very difficult for the child to speak in public social situations, and 
provide tips such as: 
Ask my child forced-choice questions (not yes/no questions but questions where they choose from two different answers)
Wait a few moments for them to answer, even if it is uncomfortable
Don't be afraid to speak to them directly, or to comment or acknowledge what you hear them saying to me
Don't try to force or coerce them to talk, but instead spend one-on-one time with them and build a positive relationship with them

Question: How do I correct peers and siblings who rescue?
Answer: Many siblings or peers are well-meaning rescuers, and rescue for two reasons - to help the child feel better and because of a lack of understanding about the best role in helping the child become stronger. The first step is to educate other children about SM, why it happens, and what friends or siblings can do to support your child. A great explanation is found in the book Charli's Choices, by Marian B. Moldan. The book explains SM in a child-friendly format and discusses great techniques for children to utilize, including asking forced-choice questions, waiting for an answer, and not answering for the child with SM (since this hinders them from becoming brave). For a young child in preschool, this book might be read to the whole class without the child present. It is important that peers understand that the child does talk at home, is working hard to be brave, and will speak at school when they are ready. Then, a class discussion could occur about how to be a good friend even though the child with SM does not speak yet. Peers can approach the child and ask them to play, understand that just because they don't speak to you doesn't mean they don't like you, and remember not to overreact when they do speak. Parents might also let their child know that the class is discussing ways to be a good friend, as well as helping classmates understand their child better.

For older children (who may be very embarrassed to hear that a discussion about them occurred in class), parents and school personnel may want to pull individual children aside and discuss these topics.

Alternatively, children may wish to write a letter to their class or record a video at home, ex- plaining both their interests and unique challenges and listing ways friends can be helpful.

Question: How should I plan for the upcoming school year?
Answer: Consideration of the next school year should always start by April of the current year. The school team and parents should carefully consider how to transition the child successfully to the next year without losing any momentum, and which teacher may be a good match for the child. It is recommended that the child spend some time with the new teacher prior to the start of the school year (perhaps by being a "helper" in setting up and organizing the classroom). This allows for the child to establish or re-establish speech with the teacher and get comfortable in the new classroom.

Parents should also request a school meeting at the start of every school year to educate the new staff on SM, update gains acquired over the summer, and update goals and interventions to be used in the new year. This meeting can also include discussions about upcoming challenges embedded in the school year (e.g., 4th graders have to present at the "Historical Wax Museum" - how will the child with SM tackle this particular challenge, and how can the team plan and prepare for it?).

Question: How do I respond when people call my child "shy"? Answer: Generally, it is recommended that parents and others avoid using or identifying with the term "shy," since it suggests that the child is temperamentally inhibited and will always be this way. Many children will also label themselves "shy" to avoid brave tasks (e.g., "I can't do that...I'm shy, remember?”). There will always be strangers in public who refer to the child as "shy," and parents may wish to ignore this and move on, having private discussions with the child that they are NOT shy but instead are feeling anxious in certain situations because of an overactive brain alarm (“.. and we are working hard to correct that alarm or teach you how to ignore it so everyone can see what a cool kid you are!"). Alternatively, parents may wish to be more direct, simply responding, "Oh, Brayden is actually very talkative when he is comfortable, and he is working very hard to be brave in public too!"

Question: Is this just being stubborn?
Answer: There is no evidence to suggest that children with SM are more stubborn than typically-developing children, or that they receive any notable social or tangible benefit from not speaking (as you would expect if they are being stubborn). Instead, many children with SM miss out on enjoyable activities and they often voice their desire to speak… but the words just get stuck. For many children with SM, not being able to speak may be a frustrating and confidence-killing situation. 
There are some strong-willed children who also have SM. For these children, stubbornness isn't the primary cause of a lack of speech but it might interfere with their willingness to talk. Playful, encouraging, covert intervention can still work very well to increase speech. Instead of being very overt in the steps that the child is taking toward brave work, parents can simply engage the child in situations and then prompt for the response they are seeking. When the child responds, the s opposed to providing a lot of attention or reinforcement for speech). For some children, any acknowledgment or praise for speaking is not well tolerated in the beginning. However, as the child's confidence builds so will their threshold for praise. Consider peppering in casual verbal praise to build tolerance for accepting praise.

It is important that parents help others to understand that SM is not defiance or stubbornness. When adults or peers believe that the child is purposefully withholding speech, they may react with either anger and coercion toward the child ("He can talk; we will just make sure he doesn't get to eat his lunch or go to recess until he talks!") or with annoyance and social dismissal ("She just doesn't like me - if she liked me, she would talk to me"). Forcing, coercing, or resorting to yelling or punishment to enforce speech is not a successful long-term intervention tool for children with SM. Being fun and engaging, building a relationship with the child, and prompting for the child to face their fears at a reasonable pace works!

Question: What should I do about siblings who present with a hesitancy to speak? 
Answer: At times, younger siblings will model the behavior of an older sibling with SM. Some older siblings will even teach or tell their younger siblings not to talk! If modeling appears to be the primary reason for a lack of speech from siblings, parents can purposefully reinforce speaking as well as hold desirable activities and items contingent on speech (e.g., "I need to know what kind of sandwich you want me to make - do you want a turkey sandwich with cheese or a PB&J?").
If it appears that the sibling truly does have symptoms associated with SM (e.g., the child has difficulty speaking even when not accompanied by the older sibling, simple prompts and rewards for speech don't work, or other anxiety symptoms are present), then the sibling may also have selective mutism. Since SM is an anxiety disorder, and anxiety disorders have a biological, genetic, and environmental (learning) component, siblings are at a higher likelihood for also developing the disorder (this is particularly true of twins). Parents are recommended to have the sibling evaluated for SM and consider intervention if it appears to be necessary. The good news is that knowledgeable parents will be able to use brave work with both siblings (each at their own levels of ability) and may even be able to create some healthy competition surrounding communication (which might increase speech in both siblings!).

Question: What about adolescents with SM? How are treatment and outcomes
different?
Answer: Much less is known about adolescents and adults with SM, due to low frequency of oc- currence and a lack of good research on this age group. Carl Sutton and Cheryl Forrester authored an interesting book on the experiences of adults with SM (Selective Mutism In Our Own Words: Experiences in Childhood and Adulthood); however, these experiences do not teach us exactly how to modify our treatment or expectations for teens and adults with SM. We do know that older children, adolescents, and adults are generally more challenging to treat and will likely need a longer intervention. This may occur because they have become accustomed to not speaking, and it is very hard to change a habit. They have often found ways of communicating or getting their needs met nonverbally, and this is much easier than the hard work it would take to speak. Additionally, they have become known as someone who doesn't talk, and speaking will likely garner a huge reaction from people!

When intervening with adolescents and young adults, there are a few key differences:

The adolescent will likely need medication in addition to behavioral treatment, as many ad- olescents and young adults have more severe symptoms and more co-occurring disorders, such as depression, social anxiety, agoraphobia (the fear of places or situations which might leave the individual feeling trapped, panicked, or embarrassed), etc.
Intervention will likely take longer and may include treating social anxiety and learning independent living skills in addition to working on the fear of speaking.
A cognitive behavioral approach (as opposed to the generally behavioral approach that this book takes) may be helpful in working with teens and adults with SM. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) utilizes exposures (like brave work in this book), but also asks the individual to think about their perceptions or thoughts and how these thoughts may increase anxiety. For instance, a teen may think, "If I talk in class, everyone will look at me and laugh" and this may inhibit them from speaking. CBT encourages "testing" those thoughts through brave practices, as well as working to correct or replace unhelpful thoughts with more helpful, balanced ones. 
The adolescent will need to be engaged in the treatment and motivated to make change. While parents of young kids can bring their children into the clinic without the child's full agreement or desire to come, bringing a teen against their will is markedly more difficult! Much of the discussion on motivation and change has to occur through the parent at first. The parent can begin to talk to the teen about the benefits and costs of not speaking, how they imagine their future if they continue to be unable to speak, when they think they would like to make a change, and how they think that change will occur.

School interventions for adolescents/young adults also presents a challenge. By high school or college, direct intervention in the school is more minimal while expectations for independence, self-advocacy, and verbal participation in the classroom increase dramatically. Parents often need to advocate for services, including a "keyworker" who assists in developing and carrying out the intervention plan at school. It is of utmost importance that the adolescent has a positive relationship with the keyworker, and feels comfortable with them, so that they have at least one adult in the school with whom they can interact successfully. Using a stimulus fading or shaping procedure may be necessary to elicit speech, so parents should request one-on-one meetings with the keyworker and student or with the student and main teachers (again, this is more difficult to obtain in middle or high school settings, as well as in college, so advocating will be necessary). 
In addition to assigning a keyworker, allowing the student alternative ways of presenting and earning participation points until the student can use their voice is helpful.

Question: What should I do if my child or adolescent will not participate in therapy? Answer: This can happen, especially with adolescents. The first-line intervention when kids can- not or will not be active participants in the intervention is to incentivize them to do so, either through privilege-earning or rewards. We must all "work" for the benefits we get in life, and it is okay for parents to insist that the benefits that kids receive (e.g., cell phones, internet access, car access, TV) must be earned by the "work" of attending and participating in therapy. However, there are still children/adolescents who do not comply despite these contingencies, and parents frequently feel helpless. Dr. Eli Leibowitz at Yale University has developed the SPACE program, a parent-training program for childhood anxiety disorders. This intervention has demonstrated good outcomes when involving parents in the treatment even when the child is reluctant to make chang- es. This parent-based intervention teaches parents how to decrease accommodation for the child's anxiety and positively prompt them to make changes (Leibowitz, Omer, Hermes, & Scahill, 2003). There is still hope for making positive changes, even if your child isn't ready to actively participate in brave work.


REFERENCES
Bartarian, J. A., Sanchez, J. M., Magen, J., Siroky, A. K., Mash, B. L., & Carlson, J. S. (2018). An Examination of Fluoxetine for the Treatment of Selective Mutism Using a Nonconcurrent Multiple-Baseline Single-Case Design Across 5 Cases. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 2-14.

Bergman, R. L., Gonzalez, A., Piacentini, J., & Keller, M. L. (2013). Integrated Behavior Therapy for Selective Mutism: A randomized controlled pilot study. Behaviour research and therapy, 680-689. 

Bergman, R.L. Treatment for children with selective mutism: An integrative behavioral approach. New York, New York. Oxford University Press. 

Black, B. &. (1994). Treatment of elective mutism with fluoxetine: A double-blind, placebo controlled study. Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 1000-1006. 

Carpenter, A. P. (2014, Dec. ). Extending Parent-Child Interaction Therapy for Early Childhood Internalizing Problems: New Advances for an Overlooked Population. Clinical Child and Family Psychological Review, 340-356.

Chase, R. E. & Eyberg, S.M. (2008). Clinical presentation and treatment outcome for children with comorbid externalizing and internalizing symptoms. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 273-282.

Compton, S. N., Albano, A. M., Piacentini, J., Birmaher, B., Sherill, J., Ginsberg, G.,... March, J. (2010). Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS): rationale, design, and 
methods. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health. 

Dummit, E. K. (1996). Fluoxetine treatment of children with selective mutism: An open trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 615-621.

Dummit, E. S., Klein, R. G., Tancer, N. K., Asche, B., Martin, J., & Fairbanks. (1997). Systematic assessment of 50 children with selective mutism. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 653-660.

Food and Drug Administration. (2016, April 13). Antidepressant Use in Children, Adolescents, and Adults. Retrieved from US Dept of Health and Human Services: https://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/Drug Safety/InformationbyDrugClass/ucm096273.htm

Grice, K. (2002). Eligibility under IDEA for other health impaired children. School Law Bulletin, 8-12.

Head Start. (2006). Policy and Regulations for Eligibility Criteria: Speech and Language Impairments. Retrieved December 20, 2013, from Head Start: http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/ standards/Head%20Start%20Requirements/1308/1308.9%20%20Eligibility%20criteria_%20Speech%20or%20language%20impairments..htm

Johnson, M., & Wintgens, A. (2017). The Selective Mutism Resource Manual (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.

Kearney, C. &. (2006). Functional analysis and treatment of selective mutism in children. Jouranl of Speech-Language Pathology and Applied Behavioral Analysis, 141-148.

Kristensen, H. (2001). Multiple informants' report of emotional and behavioural problems in a nation-wide sample of selective mute children and controls,. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 135-142.

Kurtz, S. K. (2013). Intensive treatment of selective mutism. Presented at the Selective Mutism Group Annual Conference. Berkeley, CA.

Kurtz (2015). Verbal-Directed Interaction (VDI) Skills. Kurtz Psychology Consulting PC.

Leibowitz, E. O. (2003). Parent training for childhood anxiety disorders: The SPACE program. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice.

Mayo Clinic Staff (2017). Relaxation Techniques: Try These Steps to Reduce Stress. Retrieved from https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/stress-management/in-depth/

relaxation-technique/art-20045368

McNeil, C. H.-K. (2010). Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (Issues in Clinical Child Psychology). Springer. Miller, A. (2017, March 28). (A. Kotrba, Interviewer)

Mulligan, C., & Shipon-Blum, E. (2015). (2015). Selective Mutism: Identification of Subtypes and Implications for Treatment. Journal of Education and Human Development.

Muris, P., Gadet, B., Moulaert, V., & Merckelbach, H. (1998). Correlations between two multidimensional anxiety scales for children. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 87(1), 269-270. doi:10.2466/pms.1998.87.1.269

Muris, P. O. & Ollendick, T.H. (2015). Children who are anxious in silence: A review on Selective Mutism, the new anxiety disorder in DSM-5. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev, 151-169. 

Oerbeck, B., Overgaard, K., Stein, M., Pripp, A., & Kristensen, H. (2018). Treatment of
Selective Mutism: A 5 year follow up study. European Jourant of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 

Oerbeck, B., Stein, M., Wentzel-Larsen, T., Langsrud, O., & Kristensen, H. (2013). A

randomized controlled trial of a home and school-based intervention for selective mutism - defocused communicaiton and behavioural techniques. Child and Adolescent Mental Health. 

Pionek-Stone, B., Kratochwill, T. R., Sladezcek, I., & Serlin, R. C. (2002). Treatment of selective mutism: A best-evidence synthesis. School Psychology Quarterly, 168.

Reynolds, C.R., & Kamphaus, R.W. (2015). Behavior Assessment System for Children (3rd edition). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.

Services, K. C. (2017, April 21). VDI Updated 10/15/15. Retrieved from Selective Mutism Learning University: http://selectivemutismlearning.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/VDI-UPDATED-10-15-15.pdf

Vecchio, J., & Kearney, C. (2009). Treating youths with selective mutism with an alternating design of exposure-based practice and contingency management. Behavior Therapy, 380-392.

Wright, P. & Wright, P. (2007). Wrightslaw: Special Education Law. Hartfield, Va: Harbor House Law Press.
