Chapter Two
A PARENT'S PERSPECTIVE

I (Shari) am a perfect wife and flawless mother. My children are perfect angels and I cook three- course meals every night for dinner that are elegantly plated and served in a perfectly clean and always organized home. While wearing only the most fashionable clothes in my spotless home, I spend most of my time in the pursuit of my family's happiness (which usually involves Pinterest). OK, absolutely NOT! In reality, we do not eat three-course meals, my kids are amazing (but definitely not angelic), I have no time for Pinterest or even dressing myself and there are many days that I spend thinking repeatedly about bedtime and the relief that comes when the kids are finally tucked in for the night.

If forced to, I might describe myself as a slightly anxious, actively recovering perfectionist. I grew up moving all over the United States as the daughter of a retired Air Force Colonel. I like to think that my early nomadic lifestyle and varied occupations as an adult have helped me to see the world in a unique way and relate to people of all backgrounds. Andrew (my husband) and I have an eight-year-old, Anna, who is overcoming selective mutism and a three-year-old, Emilie, who is overcoming toddlerhood (she is the ultimate "three-nager"!). Each of our children is unique, amazing and challenging in their own way, but both of our girls make us proud (most days)! When Anna was six, she (we) chose to work hard, be brave and take charge of selective mutism. Nothing in my life has been more rewarding than helping Anna find her voice and move past her silence.

Why am I sharing our story so publicly?

I have chosen to share and make public aspects of our family's journey because I know that SM can seem challenging (and it is), but I strongly believe that parents can and should play an active role in helping children overcome SM. As parents, we are in the irreplaceable position to be the most effective influencer of our children. With the right information, tools, support, and patience, over time we can create a team and an environment to affect real change; change that will ultimately steer our children away from their silence, anxiety and fear toward a path of confident connection and rewarding social relationships.


Dr. Kotrba and I decided to join forces and create Overcoming Selective Mutism: The Parent's Field Guide because we recognized that there was a distinct void in resources and publications addressing the needs of the caregivers of children with SM. Although there are many excellent and informative books written by experts, including Dr. Kotrba's best-selling first book Selective Mutism: An Assessment and Intervention Guide for Therapists, Educators, and Parents and even a handful of books written by those who have overcome SM, there were little to no resources available offering the parent/caregiver perspective. We set out to create a book that more comprehensively addresses the challenges faced by children with SM and their caregivers; a resource guide that would highlight the unique role that parents play as well as provide resources in the form of handouts and practice worksheets. Most importantly, this is the book I would have LOVED to have read when I was struggling to find Anna the help that she needed. We have gone to great lengths to include as many resources and handouts as possible. With that in mind, this book is also an excellent resource for any member of your child's care team - therapists, doctors, teachers, extended family, friends, and caregivers. You will notice that in this chapter, and throughout the book, there are large margins so that you can jot down your thoughts or take notes as you're reading. We also provide "Parent Pointers" with information that we expect to be especially meaningful to parents and "Helpful Handouts" that will assist you in locating worksheets and handouts relevant to the topic being addressed (handouts are located at the end of the chapter unless otherwise noted). Handout and worksheet example pages will be indicated by a blue compass in the top corner while pages that are meant to be interactive will be indicated by a green compass in the top corner.


Because I AM a parent, I understand the importance of having effective tools and resources readily available to make the task of helping our children less overwhelming, less time consuming, more manageable and more rewarding. Overcoming selective mutism is a journey. It is a journey for the child but also for the family. For most families, it is so much bigger than getting a child to speak and for many children, including Anna, there are additional challenges that must also be considered.

As the mom of two daughters, my most important mission is to raise them to be independent, secure, and happy children who become independent, secure, happy and contributing adults in the community. It just did not seem enough to simply address Anna's mute behavior. We also needed to address the way in which we managed Anna's related anxiety challenges and systematically teach Anna a more constructive way to approach anxiety-provoking situations. Ours is a journey with many peaks and valleys, successes and setbacks, and we continue onward with the confidence that comes from setting goals, reaching milestones and accomplishing objectives.

Anna the Amazing!
As you read this, please remember that Anna is my sweet first-born baby, so I ask you to indulge my bias. When Anna was little, she was the sweetest, most delicate, and kindest child you could ever meet. She seemed to be born considerate of other children, never taking their toys and always willing to share or give up a toy if another child appeared to "need" it. She had a giggle that would melt your heart and she loved laughing. Anyone lucky enough to hear her and witness it would usually have no choice but to join in. She loved to dress up in costumes and perform plays or dance shows for close family and friends with whom she was comfortable. She took dance, art, and acting classes with her best friends, although she did not talk with the teachers. At times, especially before she was five, she would cry when it was time to separate from me and there were many times when she was unable to participate. We only registered her for classes with her close friends because they seemed to help motivate her to participate even though she was anxious. She was a busy little girl with so many interests.

New experiences were difficult for Anna, but we managed them together. If Anna was having trouble participating at the Karate birthday party, I would join in with her. After she stood for a short time on the sidelines watching, I could usually coax her into trying it with me. Participating in a new activity without me was not something she was ready for until she was closer to 7 years old. I am quite sure there are many acquaintances who must think that I am incredibly enthusiastic about birthday parties. I sure could sell the excitement when I needed to, in order to help Anna join in. Of course, there were times when it did not matter what kind of amazement I was selling - she was not buying! There were days that I could have been pretending to roll around in candy and pet baby unicorns and she still would not have joined me. Looking back, I feel fortunate that she was optimistic enough to want to attend parties and participate non-verbally with my assistance given her level of anxiety.

Understanding Anna's Challenges

Parent Pointer

Don't be afraid to help your child navigate new or scary social situations. Some children need extra help and guidance so they can eventually navigate these situations on their own. There might be someone nearby who thinks you're "helicoptering" and they might even decide to share their opinion with you. Do not let them influence your actions -you know what you need to do to support your child.



From the beginning, Anna was a gentle soul. She literally came out "singing." Andrew and I love to reflect on the moment we first met Anna and recall the sweet sounds she made (she still has an amazing voice!). As she began to grow, however, she seemed to deviate from the normal development patterns we were reading about and from other children we were observing. Although she wasn't necessarily hitting milestones in a timely manner, she would eventually hit them. One of the first major differences that we noticed was that Anna seemed distressed when anyone got excited around her. When our little ones reach an achievement, parents often acknowledge it with excitement and clapping. I assumed this response must be universal, but when Anna was little and we clapped or got excited, she would burst into tears. It seemed to take a good while to calm her down. We began to more quietly acknowledge her achievements or ignore them altogether.  Later we would learn that Anna had sensory sensitivities and she was likely feeling overloaded with auditory input.





PARENT Pointer

It's so important to remember that every child with SM presents differently. While some children are only challenged with overcoming a fear of speaking, others must overcome a host of other challenges. Some children need only basic intervention while others will require the specialized help of an SM expert. Your journey will be uniquely yours.




As Anna grew older, we started to notice other "quirky" (for lack of a better sensory sensitivity. She became more selective about eating and the clothes that word) behaviors, which we now believe were rooted in fear, anxiety, and/or perhaps she would wear (the more worn and tattered, the better!). We also noticed that her peers. From bounce houses and tunnels to turning on the water faucet and she was fearful in situations that did not seem to elicit the same hesitancy from only challenged with blowing out birthday candles, Anna seemed to struggle.



When Anna was three, it was my friend's turn to go into the school and read to the children. She called me immediately upon leaving and she said, "It was so weird. Anna completely ignored me and acted like she didn't know who I was." intervention while others unusual. Another time, we bumped into our friend and sitter, Dottie, at a store children need only basic Anna was entirely verbal with my friend in her home and in ours, so this was will require the specialized and Anna completely ignored her and wanted to run away. Anna was close to help of an SM expert. Dottie and spoke quite comfortably with her in most settings; Dottie is essentially Your journey will be like a family member. We were confused. Was this normal behavior that, given time, would pass? Was this something to talk to the pediatrician about?

It seems like a lifetime ago that Anna was struggling in so many ways. I felt helpless and it seemed as though nobody understood Anna enough to guide us through her special challenges. Because SM is relatively rare and most professionals who encounter children with SM (pediatricians, teachers, and even mental health counselors) are unaccustomed to recognizing, diagnosing and treating them, it often goes unrecognized and therefore untreated. In our case, we saw two different psychologists who provided us with alternative explanations for Anna's challenges. The first psychologist believed that Anna might be autistic based on my input and an in-office observation/evaluation. Anna avoided eye contact, was mostly still, would not participate in play activities, and, of course, would not speak. We did not believe autism to be an accurate diagnosis because we knew that Anna was an entirely different child in other settings and situations. The second psychologist visited our home and although Anna never spoke to her, she could see Anna zipping around and presenting quite normally in her interactions with our family. This psychologist told us that Anna was doing fine, she was just extremely shy, and suggested we continue working with her to overcome her motor development delays and sensory challenges. She believed that Anna would "come out of her shell" as she grew older and more confident. Thankfully, Anna's occupational therapist, Angie, helped us to better understand Anna and she encouraged us to seek the appropriate diagnosis of SM.

When Anna was five, we received an official diagnosis of selective mutism. The psychologist who diagnosed her may have overlooked or missed the diagnosis altogether had I not provided information and insight regarding SM. Although she had very little experience with SM, she researched the diagnosis and spoke to experts to confirm our suspicions. We had a formal diagnosis to provide to the school and the psychologist was very clear that we needed to begin treating Anna's SM right away. She believed that the sooner we address it, the better.

We chose to shift Anna's weekly occupational therapy sessions to focus more on her silence and less on motor skill development. At the time, Anna was progressing nicely and making gains in that area, so it was a natural shift. Anna was three when we first began to work with Angie and from the very beginning, Angie seemed to truly understand Anna in a way that helped us lay the groundwork had a great rapport with Anna. Anna spoke with Angie right away and Angie for Anna's "recovery" in the years that followed. Because Angie had successfully treated other children with SM, we felt comfortable that she would help Anna over the SM hurdle as well. Therapy was based on the Developmental Individual- difference Relationship-based (DIR)/Floortime model. Through play and guided games, Anna practiced working through sensory challenges and learning to tolerate anxiety-inducing situations in a safe and fun play space.

Anna's Preschool Years

Anna attended the same school for both the two-year-old and three-year-old programs. Although she seemed quite comfortable at school, she was beside herself every morning when it was time to separate from my husband or me. She did not always attend to morning rituals and oftentimes she was unable (or unwilling) to participate in classroom activities. Anna preferred to be near her teachers although she wouldn't speak to them. The teachers reported that she played with a couple of her classmates and I was assured that she was happy and becoming more independent.

PARENT POINTER

When trying to explain occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, or even a visit to the psychologist's office to your child, it might be best to minimize your explanation of the visit (especially for children 2-5 years of age). For example, occupational therapy may be called "the indoor park." It's a place that involves games, toys and fun with a playmate!

Anna's school loved to include parents in the school community. We were invited quite often to join our little ones for celebrations. I went to every social event because aside from wishing and hoping to enjoy a special day with my sweet girl, Anna did not do well when parents joined in classroom activities. She turned into another little girl altogether, one who seemed unable to control her actions. She was entirely predictable in her unpredictability during classroom celebrations. My sweet baby was the only child losing her cool in any and all ways that you can imagine. I remember trying to determine if it was best to ignore her, reprimand her, spend a few moments in the hall with her, or just call it quits and take her home. I usually did a combination of all those things, feeling completely incompetent. I was certain that I was being judged and labeled as a helicopter mom, an indulgent mom, a cold mom, a weak mom, a mean mom, and/or just a plain old “bad” mom. It was emotional and exhausting caring for Anna in those days. I felt as if I was failing in an area that I so desperately wished to succeed.

PARENT POINTER

If you are the parent, therapist, teacher, extended family, friend, or doctor of a child with SM, please let the primary caregiver know that they are doing a great job and that you know it's hard work. If you are the primary caregiver, give yourself a break! You are not perfect, nor do you need to be. Keep doing what feels right and seek more knowledge to help your child; that is all that is expected of you. It does get better!

The Kindergarten Years
When Anna was almost five, she began a pre-kindergarten child development program at our local public school. It was the first time I was truly able to see Anna's interaction (or lack thereof) with her teachers. The lead teacher, Mrs. Gepford, allowed me to walk Anna into the class every day to help her get settled. Preschool had been drop-off only, so I was not able to see the extent of Anna's anxiety in the classroom. Anna didn't seem to grasp how to unpack her things or complete the other basic morning tasks. In addition, if the teacher tried to engage with her, she would freeze and look away to avoid speaking. With my help in the mornings, Anna finally started most days tear-free, albeit silent.

Mrs. Gepford and her assistant treated Anna with respect and provided her with opportunities to engage without pressuring her to do so. Thankfully, it was in their nature to treat children in a loving, caring and respectful manner. The biggest hurdle during the year was that Anna could not easily be assessed to determine her academic strengths and weaknesses. She was accommodated, but we knew that her lack of speech was abnormal. Coupled with her complete lack of communication with adults in public settings (i.e. grocery store, restaurants, neighbors, etc.), we knew that we needed more help. It was December of that year when we received the SM diagnosis from the psychologist. Based on the diagnosis, we expected Anna to receive specialized help in the school setting. However, nobody at the school had specific knowledge about SM.

With the school unable to provide help, an outside clinician seemed to be our quickest, most direct path to assistance. It was not standard operating procedure to allow outside clinicians into the public classroom but with Mrs. Gepford's enthusiasm to help Anna, we were granted permission! I suggested that Anna's occupational therapist, Angie, could be a "volunteer." Angie filled out the volunteer paperwork and within a few weeks of the background check, Angie began to attend school with Anna for an hour, one day a week. During that time, she brought games and activities that she hoped would allow Anna to open up and have fun with the other students. The ultimate goal was to help Anna feel comfortable enough to speak with Mrs. Gepford. Although Anna had a great time during Angie's visits, she ended the year without ever speaking to her teachers.

As the summer started, we were hopeful. Although Anna hadn't spoken to her teachers during the school year, there were many firsts for her that summer! She began speaking with my sister and her husband for the first time. Anna also had an amazing and important moment conquering a new activity (ice skating) and telling me afterward, "It was really hard mom, but I knew I could try and it would be okay if I fell." In the past, new activities were beyond challenging but this time she was willing to try it and even to fail. Anna was even successful in meeting a couple of new people and speaking with them in our home using a modified "fading" technique (more about this in chapter 5). We still had many challenges ahead of us, but we felt as if we were making some progress.


Mrs. Gepford helped to select Anna's kindergarten teacher early to support the transition to the new school year. She even helped to arrange a meeting with Mrs. Morris over the summer. I knew that this meeting would be pivotal; we wanted to do everything possible to help Anna feel comfortable enough to speak. Building upon Anna's previous success with in-home meetings, we arranged for the first meeting to be in our home. We knew that Anna might freeze if she knew that Mrs. Morris was to be her kindergarten teacher so we didn't tell Anna that she was meeting her teacher. Because Mrs. Morris has two little girls, we told Anna that Emilie (Anna's sister) had a playdate with a friend and that Emilie's friend had a sister who would love to play with Anna. We completely removed any expectation surrounding the meeting. In fact, the playdate wasn't even for Anna; it was for her sister!

I prepared Mrs. Morris the best that I could. I asked her to acknowledge Anna but to put more focus on Emilie. I had an activity planned so the kids could work on an art project together. Mrs. Morris was a natural! She has a laid-back personality and she didn't put a lot of demands on Anna right away. Eventually, Anna said a few words to Mrs. Morris by answering questions. After the playdate, Mrs. Morris and I were so excited (although not in front of Anna)! We planned to meet once more at the park/pool a few weeks later. We all had a great time at the pool playdate and Anna continued speaking with Mrs. Morris, although she still didn't let her true personality shine through. After the playdates, I didn't make a big deal about Anna speaking. At the time, Anna didn't like to talk about her fear of speaking and she did not want to acknowledge that it was sometimes difficult to speak.

After the second playdate, I casually mentioned to Anna that Mrs. Morris happened to be a teacher at her school and that Mrs. Morris could be her teacher. The wide grin on Anna's face gave me peace of mind that Anna would be just fine in kindergarten! We planned one more meeting in the classroom with Mrs. Morris and her assistant teacher, Mrs. Joseph, just before school started in August.

An Unexpected Detour

Right before school started, we were set to meet with Mrs. Morris and Mrs. Joseph (the assistant teacher) in the classroom. I had become relaxed because of the early success with Mrs. Morris, and I didn't put as much thought into the classroom meeting as I probably could have. I failed to realize the novelty of the school setting and the addition of a new person could have an effect on Anna's anxiety. I thought that it would be easier if I took Anna to this meeting with her teachers, without her sister. I told Anna we were going to the school to help her teachers get the classroom ready. In retrospect, Emilie would have deflected some attention and it would have been nice to have her along, as she had been included in each previous meeting with Mrs. Morris. I didn't bring an activity because I was afraid of being "pushy." As it turned out, the teachers had a sorting activity


for Anna. She was asked to test all the markers and determine which ones were no longer working. This activity, while useful, was not a speech-promoting activity (although with the knowledge I have now, I could probably rework the activity to promote speech). In addition, we were in a school setting, a challenging and "contaminated" environment for Anna. There were too many new/challenging "contaminated" variables and Anna did not speak to either teacher during this meeting. The mean? When a child classroom setting, a new person, and attention on Anna during the meeting all regularly avoids speech likely contributed to an overwhelming situation from which Anna retreated. Anna's silence at school with her teachers continued for several months despite with a specific person and/ our best efforts to prevent it. She still struggled socially outside of school as well. or in a specific environment for a long period of time, Anna would dart away from us and hide if we happened to see any of her school it can become increasingly friends around town. She also wouldn't speak with the neighborhood kids at school difficult to speak to that person or in that despite speaking quite normally with them in our neighborhood. Adults outside of our home were entirely out of her scope in terms of speaking. This rigidity in her speaking patterns alarmed us and nobody locally seemed to understand what was happening. We knew that we needed expert help to overcome SM. I had read the books, spoken with other SM moms, and Angie was doing all the right things to help Anna progress, but we still could not break through. We were at a crossroads.

Although we were years into our journey with SM, we found out that Anna still had a long way to go to be fully brave and confident. As her parents, we needed to more fully understand selective mutism.

If you wish to continue the rest of our story now, please turn to Chapter 8. However, we suggest reading along as the book is intended so that our story will be better understood in context.




PARENT POINTER

What does "contaminated." mean? When a child regularly avoids speech with a specific person and /or in a specific environment for a long period of time, it can become increasingly difficult to speak to that person or in that environment. Experts in the field of SM refer to this phenomenon as the person or the place being "contaminated." 




