Chapter Nine

ADDRESSING RELATED CONCERNS

Very few diagnoses of SM are "clean," or without other co-existing challenges. Other diagnoses may also occur alongside selective mutism, including social anxiety disorder, speech and language weaknesses, autism spectrum disorders, and separation anxiety. We provide a brief analysis of these diagnoses and interventions because it is helpful to understand the red flags, tips for intervening, and where to find more help.

Understanding and Intervening with Social Anxiety

Social anxiety (also commonly referred to as social phobia) is highly related to SM; in fact, approximately 90% of kids with SM will also be diagnosed with social anxiety (Dummit E. K., 1997; Kristensen, 2001). Social Anxiety is the persistent fear or anxiety about social situations where one may be scrutinized or judged, or where embarrassing or humiliating situations could occur. This fear may lead to avoidance of social situations. It is easy to see how a fear of speaking could also be related to or grow into a fear of being the center of attention. Children with both selective mutism and social anxiety present with the fear of speaking or communicating, but also may have a fear of being the center of attention (even if not speaking), a fear of others looking at them/watching them, difficulty being in photographs or videos, performance anxiety, and difficulty eating or using the restroom in public. They may avoid situations where others will notice or attend to them, even if no communication is required, and may actively avoid those situations (e.g., refusing to be in sports or extracurriculars, not attending birthday parties, running, hiding, or disengaging when group work is requested by the teacher, etc.). Alternatively, they may attend situations with possible social interactions but still avoid those interactions by sending others nonverbal messages not to engage with them (e.g., not making eye contact, wearing a hoodie or hair over their face, standing n the back of the room, irritated facial expression, etc.).

The evidence-based treatment for social anxiety is quite similar to SM, and frequently involves either behavioral or cognitive-behavioral treatment as well as medication. Children and adolescents are taught to face their fears in a step-wise process (similar to many of the step- wise "challenge pathways" described in this book), first practicing social activities that may be somewhat easier and then moving toward more difficult and anxiety- provoking situations. An example challenge pathway for social anxiety might include:

Playing in a Baseball Game
Challenge Pathway Example

Child goes up to bat independently at a game.
7
Child practices independently.
6

Parent starts practice on the field with child for the first 10 minutes, but then child independently practices.
5
Attends and participates in practice with parent on field, but practices independently fo the last 10 minutes
4
Participants in practice with parent on the field.

3

Arrives early to kick the ball with the coach and parent, then stands near the field during practice with parent.

2

Stands near the field and watches during practice with parent.

1


The approach for intervening with social anxiety is very similar to the step- wise approach we recommend for overcoming many of the challenges inherit to selective mutism. The child is encouraged by your words (through prompting and possibly with rewards) to face situations that are somewhat anxiety-provoking but manageable, with the understanding that we are often afraid when we are faced with a new situation. We need to be detectives to figure out if the situation REALLY IS scary or if it's just our brain giving us an unhelpful warning signal. Is our guard dog over-reacting again? Are we in danger or are we feeling discomfort? Once they have been successful several times at a specific step on their challenge to pathway, the child and parent can work together to take another small step toward being brave in social situations.


Another helpful step for children or teens experiencing social anxiety is to talk about their feelings with an understanding friend. Individuals with social anxiety often try to mask their discomfort, which can actually make symptoms worse. When socially anxious teens are able to be honest about the anxiety they feel in social situations, they are able to be themselves more, which may reduce their anxiety.

One of the best ways for parents to help their socially anxious child is to create opportunities where both parent and child can be brave together (even if yourself, you may truly feel silly and uncomfortable. For example, try wearing silly hats in public together (or something else that might be noticeably different!). The parent may need to wear the silly hat first, thus bringing attention to themselves. This would probably be an uncomfortable situation for most people! In any case, it is extremely helpful for the parent to note aloud their feelings of anxiety while drawing even more attention to their choice to be brave. You might also discuss aloud how it is hard to be brave at first, but that it gets easier, and that people rarely notice us as much as we believe they do.

Parent (wearing the silly hat): "I'm a little nervous and embarrassed to go out; I'm afraid that people will look at me and they will think I'm ridiculous and will laugh at me! But I know that practicing this will make me braver, and it probably won't be nearly as bad as the alarm system in my brain is telling me it will be!" (Parent goes out in silly hat)

Parent: "There are several people looking at me, and that makes me uncomfortable. I'm just going to smile at them and wave, so that they can se I'm not taking myself too seriously. People seem to be enjoying my silly hat - this isn't nearly as bad as I thought it would be! My brain was really sending me alarms that this would be terrible and unbearable, but it's actually kind of fun! I was afraid that everyone would be looking at me, but everyone is so busy living life that they barely even notice me!"

PARENT POINTER
Some ideas for social anxiety brave practices include raising a hand to shore knowledge in class, asking a friend to come over, calling a relative, ordering pizza over the phone, participating (nomerbally or verbally) in a play, attending a birthday party independently, or coming into the classroom late.

In fact, anytime you are able, create opportunities to model brave behavior and thoughts. At the grocery store you might accidentally drop something (when others are looking) and talk through your thoughts and feelings. "Oh no, I dropped the butter? That's ok. It's kind of funny. I guess it was slippery! I'll just pick it up and put it in the cart. No problem. I learned from that mistake." By 
pointing out your mistake, and minimizing your reaction to it, you are helping your child to understand that making mistakes is natural and nothing to be embarrassed about. If mistakes are ok, and I'm not being judged for them, then I may not have to worry so much about my actions.

Additional tips for children with social anxiety include:

Identify situations that are socially challenging, including joining a conversation, asking a peer to play on the playground, or answering questions in front of the class.

Learn about and practice relaxation techniques such as visualization, diaphragmatic breathing, and progressive muscle relaxation.

Identify negative thoughts about social situations and challenge them. For example, "Everyone thinks I look goofy" could be changed to "Nobody has time to think about me - they are worried about what others think of them!"

Pick a challenging situation to practice and develop a plan to tackle the challenge (see the example challenge pathway above).

Remember to practice good communication and interpersonal skills. For example, good interpersonal skills include listening carefully to what others are saying, making eye contact, nodding or indicating that you are listening to the speaker, and smiling occasionally.
Create a positive mantra. For example, when facing difficult situations the child could think, "I did it! It was easier than I thought! I am brave enough to do this!"

Understanding and Intervening with Speech/Language Issues

As noted earlier in this manual, many children with SM have co-existing speech/ language weaknesses. These can complicate the presentation of SM, since a child who is aware that they don't speak fluently or can't quickly come up with the right words/explanation is more likely to simply stop speaking. Speech therapy is absolutely necessary for children with co-existing SM and speech weaknesses, but obtaining both services can be complicated. Speech therapists may report that they are unable to treat the speech weaknesses if the child doesn't talk to them. On the other hand, the behavioral interventionist may have a hard time the child can speak more as a result of brave work, they may receive negative understanding the child's speech if the child isn't receiving speech therapy. When feedback on their speech (e.g., people request that they repeat things again or others don't understand what they are saying; this could be perceived negatively by the child or increase frustration).

The best-case scenario for these children is a teaming of the speech pathologist and the mental health professional, working in tandem to both increase and improve speech at the same time. The psychologist should work to obtain speech first alone with the child, and then work to transfer or generalize speech to the speech pathologist. When the child is speaking, the speech pathologist might have two goals for treatment - increase speech via brave practice/prompting and reinforcement and gentle/slow correction and remediation of speech issues. As speech improves, the psychologist might work to generalize speech to other locations, people, and demands, and they may also assist in creating speaking scenarios where the child is not likely to receive negative feedback.


Speech therapy improves speech
Improved speech is practiced behaviorally
Improved speech is reinforced
Child is more likely to increase speech use
Increased speech lends itself to more complex speech therapy



Understanding and Intervening with Defiance/Oppositional Behavior

Researchers believe that children with SM do have slightly higher rates of defiance or oppositionality at home/with parents in comparison to peers (Muris & Ollendick, 2015). This noncompliance can be above and beyond just the avoidance of communication - it is noncompliance with a broad range of parental requests or prompts. As noted before, there could be two main factors influencing the oppositionality:

1) The oppositionality or defiance acts as an avoidance tool against communication or brave work. Children may feel that the only way to reduce anxiety or discomfort is convincing their parents to rescue them. Therefore, if simply avoiding speech doesn't cause their parents to rescue them, they may engage in defiant or even verbally or physically aggressive behavior to motivate par- ents to rescue them. Chronic anxiety may also result in a child who appears oppositional even when faced with a seemingly benign request, question, or instruction.

2) The oppositionality and defiance may be unrelated to SM, and instead a stand-alone issue or outcome of behavioral or cognitive rigidity.

Defiance can be an issue when intervening with SM because of the general frustration it causes parents, as well as the resulting difficulty in prompting kids to do brave work. If the child is noncompliant with parental commands or instructions, they are even more likely to be noncompliant to instructions that will cause discomfort or anxiety.

What can parents do?

The good news is that parents and caregivers are not the problem, they are the solution!

Give appropriate instructions. Instructions or commands should be direct - they should clearly tell the child exactly what you want them to do and when you want them to do it.

Example - "Tell Dr. Evans where we ate lunch today" instead of "Do you want to tell Dr. Evans where we ate lunch?

Example - "When we go to the ice cream store today, it's your job to tell the clerk what flavor you want; if you would like I can add in the size and toppings after you tell the flavor" instead of "Maybe you could say what flavor you want at the ice cream store today?"

Move slowly through the steps. Don't increase the difficulty level of the challenge faster than your child can tolerate.

Incentivize the child with rewards, or have children earn the privileges that they have come to expect (e.g., TV time, access to tablets or phones, internet, etc.) or extra privileges (e.g., extra TV or videogame time, extra dessert, staying up 30 minutes later at night, etc.).

If the child gets angry, remember that these are tantrums; that does not mean anxiety does not play a role, but does mean that the behavior shouldn't be encouraged or catered to through "giving in" or giving excessive attention.

Ignore the oppositional behavior-most of these behaviors are attempts to avoid unwanted prompts. Calmly restate the prompt after the child calms down. If you have to leave and abandon the prompt, either come back after the child calms or let the child know you will be coming back later/ the next day to finish the brave work (and do come back!).

ing at Sc
If you can ignore the behavior, as in the case of tantrums or complaints, do. If you cannot ignore the oppositional behavior, due to aggression (hurting others or destroying things), discipline can be used.

ool Bra

State the consequences of the child's behavior with minimal talking and emotion. Do not repeat yourself; you may be invited to argue but you do not have to accept that invitation.
Example - "We don't hit. When you hit you lose access to your tablet for the rest of the day.”
Carry out punishment. Discipline should only last 24 hours and should be something the parent can and will enforce.

Make sure that the aggressive behavior does not allow the child to be successful in avoiding the brave work. If the child can hit mom and get in trouble, but at the same time mom forgets the brave work prompt, he will likely be aggressive again because his behavior was successful (e.g., it had the desired outcome of avoiding the brave work).
For children and parents who need more help, professional consultation and treatment of the oppositionality may be indicated. Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) and Parent Management Training (PMT) have been shown to effectively reduce defiance in children with anxiety (Chase & Eyberg, 2008). 

It is worth noting that these children are willing to go to such great lengths to avoid situations that make them anxious because they are trying to cope with feelings that are completely overwhelming for them. If the child tends to be oppositional when they are being prompted to speak (or in other anxiety-provoking situations), they might benefit from a consultation with or treatment by an expert in the field of SM. There truly can be a difference in the outcome when the treatment style is adjusted, considering the level of anxiety the child is experiencing. Experienced therapists can appropriately guide the child and family by knowing when to push and when to adjust the steps along the path.

Understanding and Intervening with Separation Anxiety 

Separation anxiety is a fear of separation from caregiver(s) or separation from home. Many children with selective mutism also have separation anxiety; it's unclear if this is because:

The children have a genetic or temperamental tendency toward anxiety, and therefore they are more likely to present with ANY type of anxiety.
The children fear that being in certain environments (e.g., school) may require speech or carry social and academic expectations that can be avoided by staying at home.

The children fear being separated from caregivers who are their only means of communication, who may be more likely to rescue, or who are a comfort when they are prompted to speak.


Separation anxiety is best treated with a similar method of "brave work" or graduated exposures. These exposures (what we call "challenge pathways") involve the child separating from the parent for increasing amounts of time, perhaps with rewards attached to brave behavior (staying calm, distracting themselves with play/activities, etc.) during the separations. Additionally, parents are encouraged to remain calm and avoid providing too much comfort/reassurance for the child. Instead, parents should allow the child to practice separating and offer positive but succinct goodbyes (i.e., "I know it makes you feel sad when I leave, but I will be back after school and we will have fun then"). Parents should not become angry or show signs that they are also affected by the separation, as this will inadvertently reinforce the emotional reaction of the child. Additionally, it is recommended that parents do not “sneak" away from the child, because this might promote the feeling that the parent may unexpectedly leave at any moment. Instead, when parents leave, they should exit after providing a quick but warm goodbye, and should not change their plans or stay longer than is recommended (since this may teach the child that crying or becoming upset can keep the parent around longer). Additionally, parents who have children with separation anxiety at school may need to slowly expose their child to increasingly independent separations.

It is important to note that long breaks from school, long illnesses, changes in the home setting, or other stressors can increase separation anxiety and may cause a reset or a brief increase in the level of severity of anxious feelings or behaviors. Parents are encouraged to keep schedules as consistent as possible, avoid bringing the child late to school, and reduce stress at home when possible. In some cases, being one of the first children at school may be helpful. For children with sensory challenges, arriving first diminishes the input a child must take in upon arriving in the classroom - we all know how busy classrooms can get in the morning! They are able to more quickly adjust to the empty classroom and then slowly adjust to each peer as the room becomes fuller. By the way, this trick is great for adults too! It's like "homefield advantage"! 


Arriving at School Brave Example
about this game
Help ease your child's transition to school by slowly progressing through levels that will take them from dependence to independence, reducing separation anxiety along the way.

Game Instructions
Each level represents a milestone in arriving at school independently. 
A check (or sticker) can be earned for each day that the child successfully transitions to school, meeting the expectation for the level at which they are working.
Treasure Chest Prizes: When a check is earned in a "TC" box, a prize may be chosen from a treasure chest, either at school or at home.
When the child reaches a new level, and completes a new challenge, a larger prize may be earned. 
Helpful Tips

Suggested steps are provided, but your child's needs may require a different path. 
Review the game with your child at a time of relative calm. Ask for feedback in determining appropriate steps (if maturity allows) and write steps on the Preparing for Arriving at School Brave handout.
Listen to their concerns.
Discuss your plan with the teacher and ask for their input. Consider asking the teacher for a special morning job and/or a small token of appreciation they can share with your child for arriving to class brave. 
Avoid starting a new level on a Monday or after a long break from school. A new level will require additional bravery.
Provide the child with a comfort item to keep in their backpack (if helpful). 
This game is intended as a follow-up, after less intense interventions have failed. If it does not seem to be working for your child, it may not be the right time.
Try again after some time has passed.

END
Drop child off in car line
Level
5
Walk child to the school door and say goodbye outside of the door.
4
Bring child into school and say goodbye just inside of the door.

Level

3

Leave child at end of hallway and watch them walk into the classroom.

Level

2
Leave child at an intermediate point in the hallway and watch them walk into the classroom.

Level 1
Leave child at door to the classroom and watch them unpack their belongings.

Start
Assist child into classroom and, if helpful, assist with unpacking their belongings.



preparing for Arriving at School Brave
Challenge: 
Instructions:

This worksheet can be used for any challenge requiring small steps toward a larger goal.

Assign goals for each level. As much as possible, include your child when determining goals.

Before the challenge 
Why does it feel hard?

How can we make it feel easier?


How will we feel when we complete this challenge?



After the challenge

We did it! What was the hardest part?


What did we learn?




Understanding and Intervening with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) 
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a collection of symptoms associated with difficulty in social relatedness and social understanding, among other symptoms. Technically, SM and autism are not intended to be diagnosed together (per the DSM-5, the diagnostic manual for mental health professionals). As SM may look very similar to ASD to those who are new to the condition (due to apparent differences in communication, eye contact, and socialization), it is probably important that the DSM-5 does highlight the differences between the two disorders in order to limit misdiagnoses. Nevertheless, most professionals agree that SM and ASD can and do co-exist for some children.

A child with both SM and autism might have anxiety surrounding speaking, along with communication weaknesses, immature social skills, a lack of understanding of social expectations and social rules, and possibly a disinterest in social interactions. A child with only SM may demonstrate some of these same symptoms when anxious, but relates and socializes in a typical manner when in comfortable situations.

The gold-standard treatment for autism is Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA), where the clinician breaks down the behavioral goals into small steps and reinforces the child when they successfully practice those social steps (very similar to the behavioral intervention for selective mutism!). When working with a young child with both SM and autistic qualities, the weaknesses inherit to autism will likely need to be treated first or at the same time as SM through ABA.

If the treatment focus is on intervening with selective mutism, and a child presents with some characteristics of autism, there are a few differences in expectations and intervention. More visual reminders are used, explanations and prompts given are very concrete, and communication partners are careful to prompt for factual responses as opposed to questions about preferences, feelings, or experiences. For example, the questions asked of a child with both SM and autism might focus on identifying items in the environment or providing factual information rather than ambiguous or personal questions (which may be harder for the child with autism). Instead of asking how his day was, what he feels about something, or his opinions about the recent field trip, the teacher might ask him what insects he saw or who he sat with on the bus. Furthermore, treatment or intervention for a child with both SM and ASD may need to move more slowly and may take longer.

Finally, parents and professionals will need to keep in mind that unlike children with only an SM diagnosis, social interactions may not be internally motivating for children with co-existing autism. Generally, social interactions are motivating and feel good even for children with SM, especially as anxiety diminishes through brave practice. However, we cannot assume that children with co-occurring selective mutism and autism will continue attempting social interactions after doing their brave work just because it feels good to talk, have friends, and relate verbally to people. They may need more tangible reinforcements (rewards) for brave work (since the internal motivation may not be there) and more time and effort may be necessary to help them understand or to frequently remind them of the reasons that talking is useful (e.g., it helps us get the things that we want, it keeps us safe and out of trouble, etc.).

Despite the best efforts of parents, some of these issues may require more intervention. If your child continues to be impacted by separation anxiety, speech issues, autism characteristics, or defiance, reach out to a mental health expert for support and guidance.

A Final Note...

There is no interventionist quite like a parent. We are our child's best advocate, their friend, their coach, their helper, and their biggest fan. The work that you do with your child may be a challenge, but it could also be their best success.

"Challenges are what makes life more interesting and overcoming them is what makes life meaningful." -Joshua J. Marine
