SELECTIVES MUTISM
AN ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION GUIDE FOR THERAPISTS, EDUCATORS & PARENTS
AIMEE KOTRBA, PHD


选择性的缄默症
针对治疗师，教育者和父母的评估和干预指南
AIMEE KOTRBA，博士


SELECTIVE MUTISM
AN ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION GUIDE FOR THERAPISTS, EDUCATORS
& PARENTS
BY AIMEE KOTRBA, PHD


Copyright © 2015 by Aimee Kotrba, PhD
Published by PESI Publishing & Media PESI, Inc 3839 White Ave Eau Claire, WI 54703
Cover Design: Amy Rubenzer Layout: Bookmasters Editing: Marrietta Whittelsey
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN: 978-1-55957-006-0
All rights reserved.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
Introduction
More Than Just Shy?
Silence As a Safety Net
Assessing for Selective Mutism
Re-writing the Avoidance Script
Steps Toward Bravery (Climbing the Communication Ladder)
Barriers to Greatness (How to Avoid Pitfalls)
Integrating Treatment Into the School Environment
Past “Just Talking”—Building a Child’s Confidence
Treatment Forms and Handouts
References
Author Biography

目录
致谢
介绍
不只是害羞？
作为安全网的沉默
评估选择性缄默症
重写逃避的脚本
迈向勇敢的步骤（攀登通信阶梯）
通向伟大的障碍（如何避免陷阱）
将治疗融入学校环境
超越“仅仅谈论” - 建立孩子的自信心
治疗表格和讲义
参考
作者简历
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I have decided that only crazy people write books while working, owning a business, and raising a family. And only crazier people support them in that pursuit. To my husband, Jeff—you are the craziest. Thank you so much for your support, your love, and your encouragement through this writing process. Thank you to my kids; they are too young to know what Mommy is doing when madly typing on her computer, but they give me laughter and happiness that energizes me to keep trying when I feel like giving up. None of this would be possible without my parents; you always told me that I was capable of doing anything, and although you aren’t really right (have you seen my golf game?) you made me believe in myself. I love you both. A big thank-you to Michael Rustman, Ed.D., Connie Kotrba, and Lisa Kovac, Ed.S., BCBA for editing, cleaning, and generally making this book sound better than it otherwise would have. I want to express my gratitude to the board members of the Selective Mutism Group, past and present. I am inspired by your commitment to children with selective mutism and their families. Finally, a thank you to those who work with me at Thriving Minds Behavioral Health—Marla Fields, Sheri Mehlhorn, and Katelyn Reed, M.S.—for your support and for sharing in my excitement. I have been blessed to work with you.

致谢
我已经决定只有疯狂的人在工作，拥有生意和养家糊口时写书。在这种追求中，只有更疯狂的人才会支持他们。对我的丈夫，杰夫 - 你是最疯狂的。非常感谢你在这个写作过程中的支持，你的爱和鼓励。谢谢我的孩子们;他们都太年轻，知道什么时候她的电脑上打字疯狂妈咪什么在做，但他们给了我欢笑和快乐是激励我继续努力，当我想放弃的时候。没有父母，这一切都不可能;你总是告诉我，我有能力做任何事情，虽然你不是很对（你看过我的高尔夫比赛吗？）你让我相信自己。我爱你们俩。非常感谢，你迈克尔Rustman，教育学博士，康妮Kotrba，和Lisa科瓦奇，Ed.S.，BCBA编辑，清洗，一般做这本书的声音比它更好，否则会有。我想对过去和现在的选择性Muttivity小组的董事会成员表示感谢。我对你对有选择性缄默症的孩子及其家人的承诺感到鼓舞。最后，感谢您谁在欣欣向荣的头脑行为健康，玛拉场，社日Mehlhorn和Katelyn里德，M.S.，您的支持和对我的兴奋分享和我一起工作。我很幸运能和你合作。
INTRODUCTION
When my publisher asked that I write an introduction explaining why I wrote a book on selective mutism, my first reaction was to pen a few paragraphs that could basically be boiled down to, “I am writing in order to help people” (such a psychologist answer). However, when I really thought about why I decided to write a book about selective mutism, I realized that it was out of pure frustration. Frustration at the lack of research-based information on selective mutism that is available to professionals and parents. Frustration about the myths that still exist in the general public concerning selective mutism. Frustration when other psychologists tell families that selective mutism can’t be treated. Frustration when people unknowingly use terms like “Jake refused to talk to me,” as if the child is making a malicious decision not to speak. Frustration that we haven’t adequately spread the word about selective mutism.
I wrote this book out of that frustration, to assure you that selective mutism is treatable, as well as to provide a toolkit in your work. This book is for schools, professionals, and parents who are looking for realistic and helpful strategies that can be implemented in the school, clinician’s office, and public to increase speech and decrease anxiety. Children with selective mutism can be effectively treated, and this book will give you step-by-step, clear, understandable instructions on how to help. I am regularly contacted by therapists and parents who exclaim with great surprise (and pleasure) that after implementing these strategies, their child made abundant strides in both confidence and verbalizations. I want to impart that same hope to you.
I also want to impart a good work ethic—this will not be easy. Mark Twain once said, “Habit is habit, and not to be flung out of the window by any man, but coaxed down-stairs one step at a time.” Children with selective mutism stopped speaking due to extreme anxiety, but the lack of speech quickly becomes a habit, and this habit can take time—and a lot of hard work—to change. But have no doubt— the outcome will be worth it. Being able to speak to peers, participate in class, and interact with people in public restores a child’s confidence and broadens his or her future prospects. By working through this book diligently and with patience, you can help a child thrive.
介绍
当我的出版商要求我写一篇介绍，解释为什么我写了一本关于选择性缄默的书时，我的第一反应是写几段，基本上可以归结为“我写的是为了帮助别人”（这样的心理学家）回答）。然而，当我真正想到为什么我决定写一本关于选择性缄默症的书时，我意识到这是出于纯粹的挫败感。对专业人士和家长可用的选择性缄默症缺乏基于研究的信息感到沮丧。关于选民缄默症在公众中仍然存在的神话的挫败感。当其他心理学家告诉家人不能治疗选择性缄默症时，会感到沮丧。当人们在不知不觉中使用诸如“杰克拒绝与我交谈”这样的词语时，就好像孩子做出了恶意决定不说话一样。令人沮丧的是，我们还没有充分宣传选择性缄默症。
我写这本书是出于这种挫折，向你保证选择性缄默症是可以治疗的，并且在你的工作中提供一个工具包。本书适用于寻求可在学校，临床医生办公室和公众中实施的现实和有用策略的学校，专业人士和家长，以增加言语和减少焦虑。选择性缄默症的儿童可以得到有效治疗，本书将为您提供有关如何帮助的分步，清晰，易懂的说明。治疗师和家长经常联系我，他们非常惊讶地（并且很高兴地）惊讶地发现，在实施这些策略后，他们的孩子在信心和言语上都取得了很大的进步。我想向你传达同样的希望。
我也希望传授良好的职业道德 - 这并不容易。马克吐温曾经说过，“习惯是习惯，不要被任何人甩出窗外，而是一步一步地哄骗下楼。”选择性缄默主义的儿童因极度焦虑而停止说话，但缺乏言语很快成为一种习惯，这种习惯可能需要时间和很多努力才能改变。但毫无疑问 - 结果将是值得的。能够与同龄人交谈，参与课堂，与公众互动，可以恢复孩子的自信心，拓宽他们未来的前景。通过努力和耐心地完成这本书，你可以帮助孩子茁壮成长。
CHAPTER 1
MORE
THAN
JUST
SHY?
• Jamie sits quietly on her own, while the other students laugh and talk around her. When Jamie is
asked a question, peers say dismissively, “she doesn’t talk.” The teacher, sensing her discomfort, skips her during circle time. Her parents stop trying to put her in extracurricular activities when it becomes clear she is distressed.
• Sam squirms in his chair, panic building in his seven year old body. He is unable to tell his
teacher either verbally or nonverbally that he has to use the bathroom. Suddenly, children start staring as Sam has an accident in his seat.
• Ashley’s anxiety fills her with dread when she enters the music room. Unable to utter a sound,
she withdraws and stares. Her teacher, convinced that Ashley is not trying, gives her a zero. She fails the course.
• While playing on the playground, Morgan falls off the monkey bars and breaks her wrist. She is
terrified and in pain, but cannot tell anyone she is hurt until the end of the day—five long, painful hours later when she returns home.
These upsetting stories are just a sampling of what children with selective mutism can experience. Children with selective mutism often have difficulty completing normal childhood tasks: telling a teacher about an injury, relating socially to other children, making a request to use the bathroom, asking a question in class, or participating in a group project. Their plight too often goes unaddressed and untreated, because the disability is not well known or understood. Parents and school personnel may know that these behaviors have moved outside the realm of “normal behavior” and that intervention is necessary, but often do not know what steps to take.
What can parents do to help their child feel more confident? If the child does not speak, how can the school assess the child’s knowledge? How does the school identify a plan of action? How do parents advocate for their child when they do not understand what is wrong? There are many questions and far too few answers.
Research has demonstrated repeatedly that early intervention is imperative in successfully treating selective mutism (Bergman, 2013). Early intervention helps avoid issues that arise from a continued lack of communication, participation, and socialization. Each day that the child avoids talking deepens his or her struggles, which can lead to increased anxiety, decreased self-esteem, and more difficulty in changing the behavior pattern. For the child’s sake, parents and professionals must intervene early and effectively.
These stories can be frightening and upsetting, especially for parents or caregivers of children with selective mutism. The good news is this: with the right treatment, these scenarios can be avoided. Selective mutism is treatable, and children treated with effective interventions tend to have wonderful outcomes. Children with selective mutism can learn to be brave, advocate for their needs, ask questions, respond to peers and adults, and speak with confidence. Nothing feels better than observing a child who never spoke in class raise their hand to proudly answer a question or perform in the school musical. I have sat with parents, grandparents, and teachers as they cried tears of joy watching a child with selective mutism succeed. This book will provide research-based, concrete techniques to help children slowly face and overcome their fears, increase confidence, and increase speech. Implementing the ideas found in this book will make a difference in the life of a child with selective mutism.
This book is not intended to provide all of the answers or give a cookie-cutter approach to the treatment of selective mutism, but to provide parents, school personnel, and treating professionals with guidance, ideas, worksheets, and activities that will assist in the effective assessment and treatment of selective mutism (SM). The treatment of SM is like a dance, with each participant reacting to the moves of their “partner,” and therefore it has to be individualized to each child and each specific presentation of symptoms. However, a basic treatment overview can give clarity in a world muddled with misinformation and lack of specifics about selective mutism.
第1章
不仅仅是害羞
•杰米独自安静地坐着，而其他学生则笑着和她说话。当杰米被问到一个问题时，同事们轻蔑地说，“她不会说话。”老师，感觉到她的不适，在圈子时间里跳过她。当她明白自己心疼时，她的父母不再试图让她参加课外活动。
•萨姆坐在椅子上，在他七岁的身体里恐慌地建造。无论是口头还是非语言，他都无法告诉他的老师他必须使用卫生间。突然，当Sam在座位上发生意外时，孩子们开始盯着他们。
•当她进入音乐室时，阿什利的焦虑使她感到恐惧。她无法发出声音，退缩并凝视。她的老师确信阿什利没有尝试，给她一个零。她没有通过课程。
•在操场上玩耍时，摩根从猴子栏上掉下来并打破了她的手腕。她感到害怕并且痛苦，但是直到一天结束时才能告诉任何人她受伤了 - 五个漫长，痛苦的几个小时后她回到家里。
这些令人沮丧的故事只是有选择性缄默主义儿童可以体验的样本。有选择性缄默症的儿童往往难以完成正常的童年任务：告诉老师有关伤害，与其他儿童进行社交关系，提出使用卫生间的要求，在课堂上提问或参加小组项目。他们的困境往往得不到解决和治疗，因为残疾并不为人所熟知或理解。家长和学校工作人员可能知道这些行为已经超出了“正常行为”范围，并且干预是必要的，但通常不知道要采取什么步骤。
父母可以做些什么来帮助他们的孩子更自信？如果孩子不说话，学校如何评估孩子的知识？学校如何确定行动计划？当父母不明白什么是错的时候，他们如何为孩子辩护？问题很多，答案也很少。
研究已经反复证明，早期干预对成功治疗选择性缄默症至关重要（Bergman，2013）。早期干预有助于避免因持续缺乏沟通，参与和社交而产生的问题。孩子避免谈话的每一天都加深了他或她的挣扎，这可能导致焦虑增加，自尊心降低，以及更改行为模式的困难。为了孩子的缘故，父母和专业人士必须尽早和有效地进行干预。
这些故事可能令人恐惧和沮丧，特别是对于有选择性缄默症的儿童的父母或看护人。好消息是：通过正确的治疗，可以避免这些情况。选择性缄默症是可以治疗的，用有效干预措施治疗的儿童往往会有很好的结果。有选择性缄默症的孩子可以学会勇敢，倡导他们的需求，提出问题，回应同龄人和成年人，并充满信心地说话。没有什么比观察从未在课堂上讲过话的孩子举手自豪地回答问题或在学校音乐剧中表演更好的感觉。我和父母，祖父母和老师坐在一起，因为他们哭着欣喜地看着一个有选择性缄默主义的孩子成功。本书将提供基于研究的具体技巧，帮助儿童慢慢面对并克服恐惧，增强信心，增加言语。实施本书中的想法将对选择性缄默的孩子的生活产生影响。
本书并非旨在提供所有答案或为选择性缄默症的治疗提供千篇一律的方法，而是为家长，学校人员和治疗专业人员提供指导，想法，工作表和活动，以协助选择性缄默症（SM）的有效评估和治疗。 SM的治疗就像一场舞蹈，每个参与者都对他们的“伴侣”的动作作出反应，因此必须对每个孩子和症状的每个特定表现进行个性化。然而，一个基本的治疗概述可以澄清一个混乱的信息和缺乏关于选择性缄默症的细节的世界。


WHAT IS SELECTIVE MUTISM?
Selective mutism is an anxiety disorder, characterized by a lack of verbal (and sometimes non-verbal) communication in specific settings. Although these children can speak well in certain environments (e.g., at home with family or good friends), they are mute or extremely hesitant to communicate in other social settings (e.g., school, restaurants, stores). It is important to note that these children are able to use and understand speech, but demonstrate a persistent inability to communicate in specific settings, and this inability becomes a pattern of behavior. In order to diagnose selective mutism, the mutism must be ongoing for at least one month. However, it is important to note that a lack of verbal communication in the first few months of the first year of school (whether that is preschool or kindergarten) is considered within normal limits. To be diagnosed, the student must present impairment in daily functioning (typically at school or in public settings) for more than a month, and other explanations for the lack of verbal communication (such as a speech impairment, autism, and stuttering) must be ruled out. Children can have co-occurring diagnoses (such as autism, speech impairments, etc.) but these other diagnoses cannot better explain the lack of speech in the school and/or public environments.
什么是选择性缄默症？
选择性缄默症是一种焦虑症，其特征是在特定环境中缺乏口头（有时是非言语）交流。尽管这些孩子在某些环境中（例如，在家中与家人或好朋友）说话都很好，但他们对在其他社交场所（例如，学校，餐馆，商店）进行交流是静音或极其犹豫不决的。重要的是要注意这些孩子能够使用和理解语音，但表现出在特定环境中持续无法进行交流，并且这种无能成为一种行为模式。为了诊断选择性缄默症，缄默症必须持续至少一个月。然而，重要的是要注意在学校第一年的前几个月（无论是学前班还是幼儿园）缺乏口头交流被认为是在正常范围内。要被诊断，学生必须在日常工作中（通常在学校或公共场所）出现超过一个月的损伤，并且对于缺乏口头交流（例如言语障碍，自闭症和口吃）的其他解释必须是排除。儿童可能有共同诊断（如自闭症，语言障碍等），但这些其他诊断无法更好地解释学校和/或公共环境中缺乏言语。
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR SELECTIVE MUTISM (DSM-5 CODE 313.23)
• Consistent failure to speak in social situations, such as school or in public, despite speaking in the
home or in comfortable settings.
• The lack of speech has educational or social implications.
• The mutism lasts at least one month (or six months if in the first year of school).
• The mutism is not better accounted for by a communication disorder or a pervasive developmental disorder (such as Autism). This does not mean that a child can’t have cooccurring diagnoses, such as selective mutism and a communication disorder, but the other diagnosis can’t account entirely for the mutism. (American Psychiatric Association, 2013)
As with all emotional impairments, there is a continuum of severity, from children with mild impairments to children with very severe symptoms. Children on the mild end of the spectrum may be able to speak to certain individuals, but remain mute with others. They may be able to respond when a direct question is asked of them, albeit in a quiet voice with fleeting eye contact, but struggle to initiate verbally. Children with a more severe presentation may be unable to speak to anyone in a school setting or a public place; they may even have difficulty talking to extended or immediate family members whom they see often. Some children at the more severe end of the continuum may even have difficulty responding and/or initiating communication nonverbally (i.e., nodding, pointing, writing) while participating in the classroom setting and doing schoolwork.
Research suggests that SM impacts approximately 1 in every 100 children in elementary school (Bergman, 2002). Although 1% of the elementary school population may sound quite rare, it is similar to the current prevalence rates of autism, a diagnosis that is widely known and recognized (Blumberg, 2013). Some researchers believe that prevalence rates may actually be higher, because a lack of knowledge about the diagnosis or a lack of concern about the symptoms may be masking a much higher incidence. Since children with selective mutism generally are not a behavioral problem (instead, they tend to be quite compliant, studious, and intelligent), the lack of verbal communication may not be enough for parents and school personnel to seek out treatment. Parents may not be aware that a problem even exists, since these children are usually quite talkative and outgoing at home. Even if parents are aware that the child is not talking in school, they themselves may have a history of social anxiety and may downplay the significance of the symptoms (e.g., “I did not talk until third grade either—he is just shy”). Schools may hesitate to intervene or provide special education services if there is no overt academic need. In addition, pediatricians are not always familiar with the specifics of selective mutism. Because they see many temperamentally anxious or shy children who refuse to speak in well-child visits, a mute child doesn’t raise a red flag and referrals for treatment are not made (Schwartz, 2006).
Research supports an alarming lag between the onset of symptoms and the start of treatment for children with selective mutism. Age of onset for selective mutism is approximately 2.7 to 4.1 years of age. A problem with verbal communication or anxiety (although rarely a specific diagnosis) is usually first identified when the child enrolls in school—typically at age 5 to 6 years old. The main reason that lack of communication becomes an issue in school is the difficulty in evaluating the child’s reading or learning levels when they can’t communicate. Research typically demonstrates a one-to-three-year lag between symptom onset and/or the identification of an issue (e.g., mutism in the school setting) and the appropriate diagnosis and start of treatment. Thus, the average age at which the child is formally referred for an assessment or treatment may range from 6.5 to 9 years of age. For some children this equates to four school years of avoiding speech before intervention begins. This lag in diagnosis and treatment is particularly concerning, as selective mutism becomes increasingly less responsive to treatment over time.
Selective mutism has been found in numerous prevalence studies to be more common in females than males—girls are almost twice as likely to be diagnosed with SM (Kumpulainen, 2002, Garcia, 2004). Two main hypotheses exist for this difference. First, it may be a true gender difference— internalizing disorders such as anxiety and depression seem to be more common in females (with externalizing disorders diagnosed more commonly in males). Since SM is an anxiety-based disorder, it is possible that it occurs more frequently in girls. Second, it could be a lack of appropriate diagnosis in males. Our society tends to have higher expectations of verbal socializing in young girls than boys. Consider how young boys socialize. They play and bond through shared activities, such as sports, video games, and pretend physical play. There are fewer demands for conversations during these activities. In contrast, young girls socialize and relate to peers through speech—telling secrets, role playing, and interacting with dolls. Thus, when females do not communicate, it may stand out to adults in a much more significant manner. As a result, the girls with SM may be judged as more impaired socially and academically.
Although each child is different, there are some common traits of children with selective mutism:
• difficulty responding and initiating verbally
• difficulty communicating nonverbally
• generally average to above-average intelligence
• perceptive and sensitive
• freezing and/or awkward body movements when anxious, such as stiffness, tense shoulders, strained
facial expressions, etc.
• poor eye contact
• slowness to respond (a long latency between the question and the child’s response).
It is rare that selective mutism occurs independently of other fears and anxiety issues. Commonly co-occurring disorders include social phobia and generalized anxiety disorder. Additionally, children may experience speech and language issues, school refusal/anxiety, and other types of anxiety disorders (such as obsessive-compulsive disorder or specific fears such as dogs, insects, and storms), specific hearing impairments, and defiance. Children with selective mutism frequently have anxiety about using the toilet in public places (due to the fear of asking teachers to use the restroom, and/or the loud, sudden sound of an automatic toilet flushing, the fear of being “stuck” in a social situation with other peers in the restroom, and/or the “performance anxiety” of others hearing them use the toilet). Thus, they may have more urinary accidents (daytime enuresis).

选择性缄默症的诊断标准（DSM-5代码313.23）
•尽管在学校或公共场合发表演讲，但仍未能在社交场合（如学校或公共场所）发言
家或在舒适的环境中。
•缺乏言论具有教育或社会影响。
•缄默症持续至少一个月（如果在学校的第一年，则为六个月）。
•沟通障碍或普遍发育障碍（如自闭症）不能更好地解释缄默症。这并不意味着孩子不能有共同的诊断，例如选择性缄默症和交流障碍，但其他诊断不能完全解释缄默症。 （美国精神病学协会，2013年）
与所有情绪障碍一样，从轻度损伤的儿童到症状非常严重的儿童，存在严重程度的连续性。温和的孩子可能能够与某些人说话，但与他人保持沉默。他们可能会在问到他们的直接问题时做出回应，尽管他们会以一种安静的声音与短暂的目光接触，但却难以口头提出。演讲较严重的儿童可能无法在学校或公共场所与任何人交谈;他们甚至可能很难与他们经常看到的长期或直接的家庭成员交谈。在参与课堂设置和做功课时，处于连续体较严重端的一些儿童甚至可能难以响应和/或开始非语言交流（即点头，指点，写作）。
研究表明，SM在小学每100名儿童中就有1人受到影响（Bergman，2002）。尽管1％的小学人口听起来相当罕见，但它与目前的孤独症患病率相似，这种诊断方法广为人知并得到认可（Blumberg，2013）。一些研究人员认为流行率实际上可能更高，因为缺乏对诊断的了解或对症状缺乏关注可能会掩盖更高的发病率。由于选择性缄默症的儿童通常不是行为问题（相反，他们往往非常顺从，好学和聪明），缺乏口头交流可能不足以让父母和学校的人员寻求治疗。父母可能不知道甚至存在问题，因为这些孩子通常在家里很健谈和外向。即使父母意识到孩子不在学校说话，他们自己也可能有社交焦虑的历史，并且可能会淡化症状的重要性（例如，“我直到三年级才说话 - 他只是害羞”） 。如果没有明显的学术需要，学校可能会犹豫是否干预或提供特殊教育服务。此外，儿科医生并不总是熟悉选择性缄默症的具体情况。因为他们看到许多气质焦虑或害羞的孩子拒绝在孩子的访问中说话，所以一个哑巴的孩子不会举起红旗并且没有提出治疗转介（Schwartz，2006）。
研究支持症状出现与选择性缄默症儿童治疗开始之间的惊人延迟。选择性缄默症的发病年龄约为2.7至4.1岁。口语交流或焦虑的问题（尽管很少是特定的诊断）通常首先在孩子入学时确定 - 通常在5至6岁时。缺乏沟通成为学校问题的主要原因是难以在无法沟通时评估孩子的阅读或学习水平。研究通常表明症状发作和/或问题的识别（例如，学校环境中的缄默症）和适当的诊断和治疗开始之间存在一到三年的滞后。因此，儿童被正式转介进行评估或治疗的平均年龄可能在6.5至9岁之间。对于一些孩子来说，这相当于在干预开始之前避免发言的四个学年。诊断和治疗的这种滞后特别令人担忧，因为随着时间的推移，选择性缄默症对治疗的反应越来越小。
在许多流行病学研究中发现选择性缄默症在女性中比在男性中更常见 - 女孩被诊断患有SM的几率几乎是其两倍（Kumpulainen，2002，Garcia，2004）。这种差异存在两个主要假设。首先，它可能是真正的性别差异 - 内化障碍如焦虑和抑郁似乎在女性中更常见（外科疾病在男性中更常见）。由于SM是一种基于焦虑的疾病，因此女孩可能更频繁地发生。其次，可能是男性缺乏适当的诊断。我们的社会对年轻女孩的口头社交往往比男孩更高。考虑年轻男孩如何社交。他们通过共享活动进行游戏和结交为朋友，例如体育，视频游戏和假装体育游戏。在这些活动期间，对话的要求较少。相比之下，年轻女孩通过讲话秘密，角色扮演和与娃娃互动来与同龄人交往和联系。因此，当女性不沟通时，它可能以更重要的方式对成年人脱颖而出。因此，患有SM的女孩可能在社交和学术上被判定为更加受损。
虽然每个孩子都不同，但有选择性缄默的孩子有一些共同特征：
•难以回应和口头启动
•难以沟通非语言
•通常平均到高于平均水平的情报
•敏锐而敏感
•焦虑时的冰冻和/或尴尬的身体动作，如僵硬，紧张的肩膀，紧张
面部表情等
•眼神接触不良
•反应迟缓（问题与孩子的反应之间的长时间延迟）。
选择性缄默症很少发生在其他恐惧和焦虑问题之外。通常共存的疾病包括社交恐怖症和广泛性焦虑症。此外，儿童可能会遇到语言和语言问题，学校拒绝/焦虑以及其他类型的焦虑症（如强迫症或特定的恐惧症，如狗，昆虫和风暴），特定的听力障碍和蔑视。有选择性缄默症的儿童经常担心在公共场所使用厕所（由于害怕要求教师使用厕所，和/或大声，突然的自动马桶冲水声，害怕在洗手间被“陷入”与其他同龄人的社交情况，和/或其他人听到他们使用厕所的“表现焦虑”）。因此，他们可能有更多的泌尿事故（白天遗尿）。


Communication Issues in Selective Mutism
Selective mutism co-occurs frequently with communication delays, disorders, or weaknesses. Although research provides differing prevalence rates (depending on the speech and language issues being examined), most studies suggest that approximately 30-75% of children with selective mutism also have communication deficits (Klein, 2012). These communication weaknesses can be very subtle, and parents and/or caregivers may not even be aware of them as an issue. Weaknesses can be any impairment in the ability to understand or formulate language, and may include:
• pragmatics (the ability to use language to socialize, including greeting people, starting and
maintaining conversations, and using facial expressions and eye contact)
• voice (abnormal pitch, quality, and/or loudness)
• fluency (fluid and efficient word-finding)
• articulation (formulating clear and distinct speech sounds)
• grammar (using correct sentence structure)
• semantics (appropriate word selection).
When children are effectively evaluated for speech and/or language deficits, the most striking deficits appear to be in the areas of oral narration and complex expressive language tasks. Researchers have found that parents may be the most skillful evaluators of their child’s speech and language issues (when highly trained to give the evaluation). Even when parents evaluated the child in the home setting, 42% of children in a recent study exhibited expressive language deficits at or below the 5th percentile for their age (Klein, 2012).
There are no specific answers as to why children with selective mutism have higher rates of these communication deficits. It could be:
1. Independent of selective mutism—a coincidental presentation of both issues in one child. 2. A precursor to the development of selective mutism—children recognize to some degree that speech is not fluent, clear, or easy to develop, and this causes them discomfort or anxiety. In order to avoid the anxiety and negative feedback they might receive for speech that is difficult to understand or “wrong,” they become mute. 3. Aggravating the selective mutism—both occur as a coincidence, but the communication deficits
cause the mutism symptoms to be much worse than would otherwise be the case. 4. Lack of communication experience—children with SM do not participate in as much practice
communicating verbally and therefore do not receive as much corrective feedback pertaining to their fluency and grammar.
Recent research hypothesizes that some children with SM (possibly as many as 75% of children with selective mutism) may also have subtle differences in hearing and processing that can negatively impact their ability to talk (Muchnik, 2013). When humans vocalize, the auditory system needs to prevent over-stimulation by its own vocalizations. In layman’s terms, the brain masks the sound of the speaker’s voice when they are talking. This masking allows the speaker to hear, process, and understand external sounds while vocalizing. For instance, if I am talking and someone interrupts and talks at the same time, not only can I hear them over the sound of my own voice but I can also process what they are saying. Research hypothesizes that this part of the auditory system (the middle-ear acoustic reflex, or MEAR) is functioning abnormally in a subset of children with selective mutism, and children with these abnormalities may struggle to process auditory information that comes in as they are speaking. This abnormality posits several interesting outcomes. First, a child who is already anxious and fearful of saying or doing the “wrong” thing, may discontinue speaking in social or academic situations so as to not miss important auditory information. In effect, they “face the dilemma of consciously or subconsciously choosing between speaking or listening” (Muchnik, 2013). This reduced speech would be particularly expected in situations that require a lot of auditory processing and where social anxiety may already elicit an anxious response (e.g., classroom settings or conversations with peers). Furthermore, many children with SM describe their voices as “weird” or “strange”; if they are hearing an “unmasked,” amplified version of their voice in their own head, it may very well sound strange and aversive to them.
选择性缄默症的沟通问题
选择性缄默症经常与沟通延迟，障碍或弱点共同发生。尽管研究提供了不同的患病率（取决于所检查的言语和语言问题），但大多数研究表明，大约30-75％的选择性缄默症患儿也存在沟通障碍（Klein，2012）。这些沟通的弱点可能非常微妙，父母和/或看护人甚至可能都不会将这些问题视为一个问题。弱点可能是理解或制定语言能力的任何损害，可能包括：
•语用学（使用语言进行社交的能力，包括问候人，开始和
保持对话，使用面部表情和目光接触）
•语音（异常音调，质量和/或响度）
•流畅性（流畅有效的词汇发现）
•清晰度（制定清晰明确的语音）
•语法（使用正确的句子结构）
•语义（适当的单词选择）。
当儿童被有效地评估语言和/或语言障碍时，最显着的缺陷似乎是口头叙述和复杂的表达语言任务。研究人员发现，父母可能是他们孩子的言语和语言问题的最熟练的评估者（如果训练有素，可以进行评估）。即使父母在家庭环境中对孩子进行评估，最近一项研究中42％的孩子表现出表达语言缺陷等于或低于其年龄的第5百分位（Klein，2012）。
关于为什么选择性缄默症的儿童具有较高的这些沟通缺陷率，没有具体的答案。它可能是：
1.独立于选择性缄默症 - 巧合地呈现一个孩子的两个问题。 2.选择性缄默症发展的前兆 - 儿童在某种程度上认识到言语不流畅，清晰或易于发展，这会使他们感到不适或焦虑。为了避免他们可能因难以理解或“错误”的言语而收到的焦虑和负面反馈，他们变得无声。 3.加剧选择性缄默 - 两者都是巧合，但沟通不足
导致缄默症状比其他情况更糟糕。 4.缺乏沟通经验 - SM儿童不参加同样多的练习
口头沟通，因此不会收到与他们的流利程度和语法有关的纠正反馈。
最近的研究假设一些患有SM的儿童（可能多达75％的患有选择性缄默症的儿童）在听力和处理方面也可能有微妙的差异，这会对他们的谈话能力产生负面影响（Muchnik，2013）。当人类发声时，听觉系统需要通过自己的发声来防止过度刺激。用外行人的话说，大脑在说话时会掩盖说话者声音。这种掩蔽允许扬声器在发声时听到，处理和理解外部声音。例如，如果我在说话，有人同时打断和谈话，我不仅可以通过自己的声音听到他们，而且我也可以处理他们所说的话。研究假设听觉系统的这一部分（中耳声反射，或MEAR）在一群有选择性缄默症的儿童中发挥异常作用，患有这些异常的儿童可能难以处理在他们说话时进来的听觉信息。这种异常会带来一些有趣的结果。首先，一个已经焦虑并害怕说或做“错误”事情的孩子可能会停止在社交或学术环境中说话，以免错过重要的听觉信息。实际上，他们“面临着有意识或无意识地在说话或倾听之间做出选择的困境”（Muchnik，2013）。在需要大量听觉处理并且社交焦虑可能已经引起焦虑响应（例如，教室设置或与同伴的对话）的情况下，特别期望这种减少的语音。此外，许多SM儿童形容他们的声音“怪异”或“奇怪”;如果他们在自己的脑海中听到一个“未掩盖的”放大版本的声音，那么听起来可能很奇怪而且厌恶他们。

Bilingual children have much higher rates of SM, and higher rates of SM exist in communities with many ethnic minorities or immigrant families (Krysanski, 2003). These children tend to have pre- existing anxiety or social inhibition, and may become mute because of the uncomfortable feelings surrounding using an unfamiliar language. Consider this scenario: a young girl moves from Brazil to the United States at the start of her kindergarten year. Her native language is Portuguese, and this is the primary language spoken at home by her parents and sister. Her parents note that she has a history of separation anxiety and has always disliked being the center of attention. When she starts school, she sees other children speaking the English language well and feels frustrated and embarrassed that she cannot clearly communicate. She stops speaking in order to avoid the embarrassment of making a mistake or saying something incorrectly, and this pattern of not speaking is solidified as time passes, even though she is learning the new language at an appropriate pace. She becomes known by classmates as “the kid that doesn’t talk” and fears that if she does talk at some point, peers will laugh at her accent or get overly excited about hearing her voice, bringing unwanted attention. The longer this behavior continues, the more difficult it is to change. Unfortunately, this avoidant behavior can transfer back to the native language, and the child can become mute even in the language they feel most comfortable speaking. This transference of mutism may be because as the child becomes very good at avoiding communication, the avoidance generalizes to all communication.
It is important to note two things—first, being bilingual does not cause selective mutism. In fact, there are many benefits to bilingualism, and parents should not feel guilty after the fact for teaching their child a second language. Second, there is a normal silent period when learning a new language; therefore, mutism for a few weeks to up to six months is considered within the realm of “typical” for those learning a second language. It is notable that the younger the child, the longer the silent period may last. Older children may be silent for a few weeks to a few months, while younger children may be relatively silent for a year while learning a new language (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association). However, if signs of mutism are spilling over into the native language, the child seems quite temperamentally anxious in other areas, or they are not beginning to speak their new language aloud after six months to a year, assessment for selective mutism may be warranted.
双语儿童的SM率较高，而且在有许多少数民族或移民家庭的社区中存在较高的SM率（Krysanski，2003）。这些孩子往往存在预先存在的焦虑或社交抑制，并且可能因为使用不熟悉的语言而感到不舒服而变得无声。考虑一下这种情况：一个年轻女孩在幼儿园开始时从巴西搬到美国。她的母语是葡萄牙语，这是她父母和妹妹在家里说的主要语言。她的父母注意到她有分离焦虑的历史，并且一直不喜欢成为关注的焦点。当她开始上学时，她看到其他孩子说英语很好，感到沮丧和尴尬，她无法清楚地沟通。她停止说话是为了避免犯错误或说错话的尴尬，这种不说话的模式随着时间的推移而固化，即使她正在以适当的速度学习新语言。她被同学称为“不会说话的孩子”，并担心如果她在某个时候说话，同伴会嘲笑她的口音或者过于兴奋地听到她的声音，带来不必要的注意力。这种行为持续的时间越长，改变就越困难。不幸的是，这种回避行为可以转移回母语，即使用他们认为最舒服的语言，孩子也可以变得无声。这种缄默的转移可能是因为当孩子变得非常擅长避免交流时，避免会推广到所有的交流。
重要的是要注意两件事 - 首先，双语不会引起选择性的缄默。事实上，双语制有很多好处，父母在教孩子第二语言之后不应该感到内疚。第二，学习新语言时有一个正常的静默期;因此，对于那些学习第二语言的人来说，几周到六个月的缄默被认为是“典型”的范畴。值得注意的是，孩子越小，沉默期就越长。年龄较大的孩子可能会沉默几周到几个月，而年幼的孩子在学习一门新语言（美国语言 - 听力协会）时可能会相对沉默一年。然而，如果猥亵的迹象蔓延到母语，孩子在其他方面似乎非常焦虑，或者他们在六个月到一年之后没有开始大声说出他们的新语言，可能需要对选择性缄默进行评估。

HOW DO YOU DIFFERENTIATE SOCIAL PHOBIA AND SELECTIVE MUTISM?
Social phobia and selective mutism are often confused due to their many similarities. In fact, approximately 70-100% of children with SM receive an additional diagnosis of social phobia (Yeganeh, 2003). Both SM and social phobia are effectively treated with the same or very similar psychopharmacological treatment and cognitive behavioral therapy with the goal of decreasing anxiety and increasing social activities. Both can involve a distinct fear of interacting. Family history studies support a genetic relationship between selective mutism and social phobia: 70% of first degree relatives of children with SM have social phobia, and 37% have selective mutism (Chavira, 2007). Researchers continue to explore the differentiation between the symptoms and etiology of selective mutism versus social phobia.
Social phobia is diagnosed when the child has a persistent fear (such as the fear of being humiliated, embarrassed, and/or scrutinized) of one or more social and/or performance situations where they are exposed to unfamiliar people (both peers and adults). When exposed to these situations, the child becomes anxious. Due to the anxiety, these children either avoid these situations or endure them with intense anxiety and distress. These symptoms must last for at least six months and interfere with school and/or socialization significantly. Selective mutism also has an avoidance component and anxiety, which is where the symptom overlap lies.
Some clinicians and researchers hypothesize that selective mutism is an extreme expression of social phobia. As a result, in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), selective mutism was subsumed under social anxiety as a severe childhood manifestation of social anxiety (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Researchers are still examining the evidence behind this theory and are currently obtaining mixed results. Many children with SM enjoy social interactions that are nonverbal (e.g., do not have an expectation of speech) and do not avoid them; they specifically avoid verbalizations. Children with social phobia, however, tend to avoid all types of social interactions. While the onset of selective mutism is approximately three to five years of age, Social phobia typically manifests between the ages of eleven and thirteen. Furthermore, if SM was simply a severe presentation of social phobia, we would expect that the children with SM would rate themselves as having more anxiety than children with social phobia. When children with SM were compared in a controlled research setting with children with social phobia, children with SM did not rate themselves as experiencing higher levels of social distress than the children with social phobia (Yeganeh, 2003). Two reasons have emerged as to why there may be a discrepancy between the level of anxiety that others perceive in SM and the level of anxiety the children self-report. First, it may be that children with SM have found a successful avoidance strategy—they lower their anxiety by refusing to speak. Second, adults could be over-interpreting the child’s anxiety—they assume that a child who does not speak must be overcome with fear. More research is needed to delineate the relationship between selective mutism and social phobia.
您如何区分社交恐惧症和选择性缄默症？
社交恐惧症和选择性缄默症由于其许多相似之处而经常被混淆。事实上，大约70-100％的SM患儿会接受额外的社交恐怖症诊断（Yeganeh，2003）。 SM和社交恐怖症都通过相同或非常相似的精神药理学治疗和认知行为疗法得到有效治疗，目的是减少焦虑和增加社交活动。两者都可能涉及明显的互动恐惧。家族史研究支持选择性缄默症和社交恐怖症之间的遗传关系：70％的SM儿童的一级亲属有社交恐惧症，37％有选择性缄默症（Chavira，2007）。研究人员继续探索选择性缄默症与社交恐怖症的症状和病因之间的区别。
当孩子对一个或多个社交和/或表现情况持续恐惧（例如害怕被羞辱，尴尬和/或被仔细检查）时，社会恐惧症被诊断出来，他们暴露于不熟悉的人（同龄人和成人） 。当暴露于这些情况时，孩子会变得焦虑。由于焦虑，这些孩子要么避免这些情况，要么忍受强烈的焦虑和痛苦。这些症状必须持续至少六个月，并显着干扰学校和/或社交。选择性缄默症也有避免成分和焦虑，这是症状重叠的地方。
一些临床医生和研究人员假设选择性缄默症是社交恐怖症的极端表现。因此，在第五版“精神障碍诊断和统计手册”（DSM-5）中，选择性缄默症被社会焦虑归入社会焦虑的严重童年表现（American Psychiatric Association，2013）。研究人员仍在研究这一理论背后的证据，目前正在取得不同的结果。许多患有SM的儿童享受非语言的社交互动（例如，没有期望的言语）并且不能避免它们;他们特别避免言语化。然而，患有社交恐惧症的儿童往往会避免所有类型的社交互动。虽然选择性缄默症的发病时间大约是三到五岁，但社交恐惧症通常表现在十一岁到十三岁之间。此外，如果SM仅仅是社交恐惧症的严重表现，我们会期望患有SM的儿童会比社交恐惧症患儿更加焦虑。当患有SM的儿童在受控研究环境中与患有社交恐惧症的儿童进行比较时，患有SM的儿童并不认为自己比社交恐惧症儿童经历更高的社交困难（Yeganeh，2003）。出现了两个原因，即为什么其他人在SM中感知到的焦虑水平与孩子自我报告的焦虑水平之间可能存在差异。首先，可能是患有SM的儿童已经找到了成功的避免策略 - 他们通过拒绝说话来降低他们的焦虑。其次，成年人可能会过度解释孩子的焦虑 - 他们认为不会说话的孩子必须克服恐惧。需要更多的研究来描述选择性缄默症和社交恐怖症之间的关系。

WHERE DOES SELECTIVE MUTISM ORIGINATE?
As with most anxiety disorders, there appears to be a genetic component in the development of selective mutism. The genetic predisposition for anxiety that runs in families can manifest differently for different family members, but the core genetic component appears to be the same. Thus, family members may have other types of anxiety (e.g., social phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder) but the genetic makeup of the child results in the anxiety manifesting as selective mutism. It is not uncommon for children with selective mutism to have parents with characteristics of SM or social phobia, and their siblings are more likely to exhibit symptoms of selective mutism (particularly identical twins).
In addition to a genetic predisposition to anxiety, research demonstrates some abnormalities in brain reactivity in children with selective mutism. Most research into the brain mechanisms of anxiety find that the amygdala plays a large role in modulating our reaction to and perception of anxiety (Davis, 1992). When our brain perceives a situation, person, or event to be dangerous, our amygdala reacts with the fight or flight response, sending out signals from our cortex to physically and mentally prepare our body. However, if the perceived situation is not truly dangerous, our cortex has a very difficult time “turning off” the signal from the amygdala. This is the way in which reactions to “irrational” or minor dangers develop into physiological anxiety responses. Likewise, research has shown over-reactivity in the amygdala of children with selective mutism, meaning that they may perceive situations that have a verbal component as being extremely threatening. Furthermore, they have a much more difficult time returning to baseline functioning in comparison to non-anxious peers, and thus their brain functioning appears hyper-vigilant and over-reactive across time. This lack of habituation, or return to baseline, may be why these children’s fear is persistent and difficult to reduce.
As noted before, often parents of children with SM also have social anxieties, and this can affect the parent’s ability to cope with their own anxiety around their children. Resultantly, children may be not only genetically predisposed to anxiety, but may also be learning anxious behaviors via parental modeling. Parents may avoid social situations secondary to their own anxiety, reducing the child’s exposure to novel situations and people and limiting the number of opportunities the child has for practicing “brave talking.” Additionally, parents may inadvertently portray the world and unknown people as dangerous, unpredictable, and untrustworthy, thereby increasing the child’s anxiety.
For example, I met Jenny’s parents at a diagnostic intake session (the first session before treatment, where a background history is obtained and a plan for treatment is developed). It was obvious that Jenny’s mother, Allysa, was uncomfortable in my office—she did not make eye contact, spoke softly, and took several deep breaths during the meeting. During our discussion, Allysa admitted that Jenny had seen her mother have several panic attacks in the past, and although the panic attacks were now well- controlled with medication, she still struggled with social anxiety. Allysa reported avoiding large crowds, evading phone calls (Jenny’s father handled much of the “public relations” for the family), and staying in the home most of the time. Because of her mother’s anxiety, Jenny’s family rarely went out for dinner at local restaurants, and the children were not involved in any extracurricular activities. When I inquired about Jenny’s speech with family friends or extended family, her mother admitted that they do not really have many friends and do not see extended family. The children were not allowed to play with neighborhood kids, since the parents viewed the families as “questionable” and “rough.”
Unfortunately, Jenny has experienced a nature/nurture double whammy. Not only is there an obvious predisposition to anxiety in the family history, but this anxiety is modeled overtly and conveyed through subtle parenting decisions on a daily basis. Additionally, Jenny’s parents delayed treatment because of the anxiety around seeking out a referral and making an appointment with a professional they did not know. For a parent who has social phobia, calling the office of an unknown professional, making an appointment, talking to them about intimate details of the family life, and allowing that person to interact with their child may be more than they can handle.
选择性缄默症因何而起？
与大多数焦虑症一样，选择性缄默症的发展似乎存在遗传因素。在家庭中存在的焦虑的遗传易感性对于不同的家庭成员可以表现出不同，但核心遗传成分似乎是相同的。因此，家庭成员可能具有其他类型的焦虑（例如，社交恐惧症，广泛性焦虑症，强迫症），但是儿童的遗传构成导致焦虑表现为选择性缄默症。有选择性缄默症的孩子有父母具有SM或社交恐惧症的特征，并且他们的兄弟姐妹更有可能表现出选择性缄默症（特别是同卵双胞胎）的症状，这种情况并不少见。
除了对焦虑的遗传倾向之外，研究还表明选择性缄默症儿童的大脑反应性存在一些异常。大多数关于焦虑的大脑机制的研究发现，杏仁核在调节我们对焦虑的反应和感知方面起着重要作用（Davis，1992）。当我们的大脑将某种情况，人或事件视为危险时，我们的杏仁核会对战斗或飞行反应作出反应，从我们的皮层发出信号，为我们的身体做好身心准备。然而，如果感知到的情况并非真正危险，那么我们的皮质很难“关闭”来自杏仁核的信号。这是对“非理性”或轻微危险的反应发展成生理焦虑反应的方式。同样，研究显示，选择性缄默症儿童的杏仁核过度反应，这意味着他们可能会认为具有言语成分的情况具有极大的威胁性。此外，与非焦虑的同伴相比，他们在返回基线功能方面有更困难的时间，因此他们的大脑功能在时间上显得过于警惕和过度反应。这种缺乏习惯，或回归基线，可能是为什么这些孩子的恐惧是持久的，难以减少。
如前所述，患有SM的儿童的父母通常也有社交焦虑，这可能会影响父母应对孩子周围焦虑的能力。结果，儿童可能不仅在遗传上易患焦虑症，而且还可能通过父母建模学习焦虑行为。父母可以避免自己焦虑之外的社交场合，减少孩子接触新情况和人的风险，并限制孩子练习“勇敢的说话”的机会。此外，父母可能会无意中将世界和不明身份的人描绘成危险的，不可预测，不值得信任，从而增加了孩子的焦虑。
例如，我在诊断摄入会议上（在治疗前的第一个阶段，在那里获得了背景病史并制定了治疗计划）遇到了珍妮的父母。很明显，Jenny的母亲Allysa在我的办公室里感到不舒服 - 她在会议期间没有进行目光接触，轻声说话，并且深吸了几口气。在我们的讨论中，Allysa承认Jenny过去曾见过她的母亲有过几次惊恐发作，尽管惊恐发作现在已经用药物控制得很好，但她仍然在为社交焦虑而苦苦挣扎。 Allysa报告说避免大量人群，逃避电话（Jenny的父亲处理了大部分家庭的“公共关系”），并且大多数时间都呆在家里。由于母亲的焦虑，珍妮的家人很少去当地的餐馆吃饭，孩子们没有参加任何课外活动。当我询问珍妮与家人朋友或大家庭的演讲时，她的母亲承认他们并没有很多朋友，也没有看到大家庭。由于父母认为这些家庭“有问题”和“粗暴”，所以孩子们不允许和邻居一起玩耍。
不幸的是，珍妮经历了一次自然/哺育双重打击。在家族史中不仅存在明显的焦虑倾向，而且这种焦虑是公开模仿的，并且通过每日微妙的育儿决定来传达。此外，珍妮的父母推迟治疗，因为他们一直在寻找转诊和与他们不知道的专业人士预约。对于有社交恐惧症的父母，打电话给一个不知名的专业人士的办公室，预约，与他们谈论家庭生活的私密细节，并允许该人与他们的孩子互动可能比他们能够处理的更多。
THE HISTORY OF SELECTIVE MUTISM
Originally named “aphasia voluntaria” by German physician, Adolph Kussmaul, in 1877, selective mutism was thought to be caused by a traumatic episode in the child’s past or by inadequate and/or abusive parental relationships with the child. Kussmaul and subsequent practitioners believed that the lack of communication in some settings while being able to speak in other settings was a voluntary decision (Kussmaul, 1877). In 1934, Swiss psychiatrist Moritz Tramer changed the name to “elective mutism,” continuing to underscore the belief that the child was “electing” not to speak. The name was finally changed to selective mutism in 1994, consistent with current research that the mutism occurs in select situations because of the anxiety experienced in those environments as opposed to a decision to withhold speech (Sharoni, 2012). Confusion still occurs with the name selective mutism, as some laypeople believe that the child can “select” when they will and will not speak, leading to beliefs that the driving force of the disorder is oppositionality, control, and manipulation. That is not the case—these children are literally unable to speak in certain “select” environments. The term selective mutism emphasizes that the anxiety concerning speech is selectively dependent on the social context.
Originally, selective mutism was thought to be caused by a traumatic incident in early childhood, such as neglect, abuse, or being witness to violence. The hypothesis proposed that these children, who experienced such trauma, had chosen to become mute to keep a family secret or punish the offender. Treatment focused on uncovering the traumatic episode and addressing the underlying feelings or improving family relationships. However, no research has found a causal link between the development of selective mutism and traumatic past experiences.
In her book “I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings—After Six Years of Mutism,” Maya Angelou tells the story of a traumatic childhood and her subsequent mutism for six years following a horrific experience. This infrequently occurring mutism is not selective mutism; instead, it can be a symptom of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Children with mutism as a result of PTSD generally have a normal developmental background, where parents observed them speaking to others and saw little significant anxiety until immediately after the traumatic experience. This sudden loss of speech tends to be relatively short-lived and is not associated with a shy, anxious temperament prior to the trauma. In contrast, children with selective mutism have a history of anxiety about talking to others in public, such as in preschool, church, or daycare; the mutism does not appear spontaneously.
选择性缄默症的历史
最初由德国医生阿道夫·库斯马尔（Adolph Kussmaul）于1877年命名为“aphasia voluntaria”，选择性缄默症被认为是由儿童过去的创伤性事件或与儿童的父母关系不足和/或虐待造成的。 Kussmaul和随后的从业者认为，在某些环境中缺乏沟通能够在其他环境中发言是一种自愿的决定（Kussmaul，1877）。 1934年，瑞士精神病学家莫里茨特拉默将这个名字改为“选择性缄默症”，继续强调这个孩子“选择”不说话的信念。这个名字最终于1994年改为选择性缄默症，与目前的研究一致，即叛变主义在某些情况下发生，因为这些环境中出现了焦虑，而不是决定隐瞒言论（Sharoni，2012）。名称选择性缄默症仍然会出现混乱，因为一些外行人认为孩子可以“选择”他们什么时候会说话，也不会说话，从而导致人们相信这种疾病的驱动力是对立，控制和操纵。事实并非如此 - 这些孩子实际上无法在某些“选择”环境中说话。选择性缄默这一术语强调言语焦虑是选择性地依赖于社会背景。
最初，选择性缄默被认为是由童年早期的创伤事件引起的，例如忽视，虐待或暴力见证。该假设提出，这些经历过这种创伤的儿童选择静音以保持家庭秘密或惩罚罪犯。治疗的重点是揭露创伤性事件，解决潜在感受或改善家庭关系。然而，没有研究发现选择性缄默症的发展与创伤性过去经历之间存在因果关系。
玛雅·安吉洛在她的书“我知道为什么笼中的鸟唱 - 经过六年的缄默”之后，讲述了一个创伤性童年的故事，以及她在一次可怕的经历之后六年的叛变。这种不经常发生的缄默不是选择性的缄默;相反，它可能是创伤后应激障碍（PTSD）的症状。由于创伤后应激障碍而患有缄默症的儿童通常具有正常的发育背景，其中父母观察他们与他人交谈并且在创伤经历之后立即看到很少的显着焦虑。这种突然的语言丧失往往是相对短暂的，并且与创伤之前的害羞，焦虑的气质无关。相比之下，选择性缄默症的儿童在公共场合，如学前班，教堂或日托中与其他人交谈时有着焦虑的历史。缄默症并不是自发出现的。

Progression of Mutism

Typical progression of selective mutism.
Although we have no evidence that SM develops because of a traumatic episode, many children have experienced some form of trauma prior to the development of their selective mutism, generally related to being forced to unwillingly face their fear of speaking. When teachers, strangers, extended family members, and others do not understand SM, they may believe that the child is being noncompliant and attempt to “force” them to speak or withhold things like use of the bathroom, lunch, or privileges to motivate them to talk. This “flooding” of anxiety may be a distressing experience for some children.
Traumatizing or distressing interactions as a result of selective mutism can occur in many ways. For example, a third grade boy with selective mutism may have an understanding teacher, but the lunch monitor does not know about the diagnosis or his challenges with using his voice. When the child gets to the front of the lunch line, the monitor asks him what he would like to have for lunch, and instead of answering he looks down and smiles. His lack of response, coupled with the smile, is misread by the lunch monitor as a smirk, and given the long line behind him she becomes frustrated. “Unless you can tell me what you want, I cannot serve you. Sit down and let me know when you are ready to order; you are holding up the line.” How many days will go by until that child eats? He probably will not be able to order, particularly in front of a long line of peers, and asserting himself to seek out his teacher to get help is also incredibly anxiety-provoking. He may have to wait until an adult notices he is not eating and determines the cause—and that could be quite a few hunger-filled days or weeks later. Sounds pretty traumatic to me.
For children with selective mutism, the avoidance of speaking in select situations and environments acts as deliberate self-protection from the intense anxiety experienced by the child, not deliberate oppositionality (Bergman RL, 2002). Too commonly, adults in the lives of children with selective mutism begin to believe that the child is just being “difficult” or “rude.” The natural reaction to this interpretation is increasing the communication expectations for the child and then punishing, shaming, or disciplining him or her for not speaking. Unfortunately, these consequences may both increase the anxiety around speaking and lead to lowered self-esteem and self-efficacy.
缄默症的进展



选择性缄默症的典型进展。
尽管我们没有证据证明SM因创伤事件而发展，但许多儿童在选择性缄默症发展之前经历过某种形式的创伤，这通常与被迫不情愿地面对他们的言语恐惧有关。当教师，陌生人，大家庭成员和其他人不理解SM时，他们可能会认为孩子不合规并试图“强迫”他们说话或隐瞒诸如使用浴室，午餐或特权来激励他们。说说。这种焦虑的“泛滥”可能对某些孩子来说是一种令人痛苦的经历。
由选择性缄默引起的创伤或痛苦的相互作用可以以许多方式发生。例如，一个有选择性缄默症的三年级男孩可能会有一位理解老师，但午餐监测员不知道使用他的声音的诊断或他的挑战。当孩子到达午餐线的前面时，显示器会问他想吃什么午餐，而不是回答，他低头微笑。他没有回应，再加上微笑，被午餐监视器误读为假笑，而且由于他身后的长线，她变得沮丧。 “除非你能告诉我你想要什么，否则我无法为你服务。坐下来，当你准备订购时让我知道;你正在坚持这条路线。“在这个孩子吃东西之前会过几天？他可能无法订购，特别是在一长串同行面前，并主张自己找老师寻求帮助也是令人难以置信的焦虑。他可能要等到一个成年人注意到他没有进食并确定原因 - 这可能是几天或几周后充满饥饿感。对我来说听起来很痛苦。
对于有选择性缄默症的儿童，避免在某些情况和环境中说话会对儿童所经历的强烈焦虑进行刻意的自我保护，而不是故意的反对（Bergman RL，2002）。通常情况下，选择性缄默症儿童生活中的成年人开始相信孩子只是“困难”或“粗鲁”。这种解释的自然反应是增加对孩子的沟通期望，然后惩罚，羞辱或惩戒他或她不说话。不幸的是，这些后果可能会增加说话时的焦虑，导致自尊心和自我效能降低。

IS IT REALLY ANXIETY, OR JUST CONTROL?
Occasionally at a school meeting or when speaking to extended family members, an adult will make a comment such as, “It seems to me Lisa chooses not to speak when adults are around. I think that she is just trying to get out of doing what she is supposed to do. She will speak to her best friend when I am in the room, but when I get close she puts her hand over her mouth and stops talking. I just do not see the anxiety at all.” Parents receive school report cards with notes like, “Shannon refused to participate in group activities” or, “Brendan chose not to do his oral presentation today; instead, he ran out of the room when he was called to the front of the class.” The anxiety that these children experience is so debilitating that they often describe it as feeling like “I cannot get the words out of my throat” or, “I will die if I get up in front of the class!” My challenge to adults who believe the child is simply being controlling is to take a full day and make it a goal not to speak outside your home. That means no asking where the bathroom is in public, no ordering at restaurants, and no talking to friends. No answering the phone. When people say something to you at the store, look down and do not respond. Don’t get hurt, lost, or confused, because you are on your own; you cannot ask for assistance. Is this a fun day? Is it enjoyable to remain silent, or just exhausting and anxiety-provoking? It is difficult to believe that a child, simply out of spite, defiance, or manipulation, is able to stay silent day after day, year after year, particularly when many of these kids miss out on enjoyable experiences, friendships, and even rewards because they are unable to speak to others.
I have experienced a similar feeling when traveling in foreign countries. I know in certain environments that speaking will not be successful because no one will understand English, and I do not speak the native language. This is incredibly anxiety-provoking for me—what if I need to use the bathroom and do not know where it is located? What if I get hurt and need medical intervention? What if I am lost and need directions? This is the everyday plight of a child with selective mutism.
Children appear to have two different reactions when it comes to the expression of anxiety, and these reactions likely originate from our natural fight-or-flight response to fearful stimuli. When placed in situations we perceive as dangerous, our bodies react by preparing us to either fight, freeze, or flee (avoid). If the fear is real (e.g., an impending car accident or a large bear), this physical preparation is helpful—it causes our muscles to tense, our heart rate to accelerate, our breathing to quicken, and our thoughts to move rapidly. Even if our life is not in danger, and the physical preparation is not justified, our amygdala may be slow to quiet the “danger signal” and we still tend to act with aggression or avoidance. The majority of children with selective mutism react with avoidance when feeling anxious, but a minority group of children, when pushed too quickly to communicate, may react with “fighting” (oppositional) behaviors.
In practical terms, many of the children I see in the clinical setting look outwardly anxious. They freeze when approached, demonstrate poor eye contact, slip into occasional tearfulness, and avoid verbal (and at times nonverbal) communication. Less frequently, a child will present as anxious/oppositional; they look angry and may grunt or lash out physically. At times, they may even have a sly smile on their face and slowly shake their head when I encourage them to take part in learning “brave behaviors.” For example, a patient I began seeing at age seven was completely unable to talk to me for the first several sessions but, if she felt at all prompted to communicate, would scream loudly, kick, hit, and hide under the desk. I scheduled her as the last session of the day so that she did not frighten other patients in the clinic with her loud screams. Despite outward appearances, her mutism was not born of defiance, but instead the defiant behaviors (strong-will, temper tantrums, and physical aggression) were the expression of the extreme anxiety she was experiencing. She was a “fighter” instead of a “fleer.” It is possible for children to have co-occurring oppositional behavior, just as many children in the general population can be defiant at times. In fact, research suggests that rates of oppositional behavior in children with SM in both home and school mimic rates in the general population. The mutism is not a symptom of the oppositional behavior. It is a symptom of the anxiety.

它真的很焦虑，还是只是为控制？
偶尔在学校会议上或与大家庭成员交谈时，成年人会发表评论，例如，“在我看来丽莎选择不在成人身边时发言。我认为她只是试图摆脱她应该做的事情。当我在房间里时，她会和她最好的朋友说话，但当我靠近时，她把手放在嘴边，停止说话。我根本没有看到焦虑。“父母收到的学校成绩单上写着”Shannon拒绝参加小组活动“或”，“Brendan今天选择不做口头报告;相反，当他被叫到班级前面时，他跑出了房间。“这些孩子经历的焦虑是如此令人虚弱，以至于他们常常把它描述为”我无法从喉咙里听到这些话“或者， “如果我在课堂上起床，我会死的！”我对那些认为孩子只是在控制的成年人的挑战是要花一整天的时间，不要在家外说话。这意味着不要问卫生间在公共场所，餐厅没有订购，也没有与朋友交谈。没有接听电话。当人们在商店里对你说些什么时，往下看，不要回应。不要受伤，迷失或困惑，因为你是独立的;你不能寻求帮助。这是一个有趣的一天吗？保持沉默，或者只是疲惫和焦虑，这是否令人愉快？很难相信一个孩子，只是出于恶意，蔑视或操纵，能够日复一日地，年复一年地保持沉默，特别是当这些孩子中的许多人错过了愉快的经历，友谊甚至奖励时，他们无法与他人交谈。
我在国外旅行时也有类似的感觉。我知道在某些环境中，说话不会成功，因为没有人会理解英语，我也不会说母语。这对我来说是令人难以置信的焦虑 - 如果我需要使用浴室并且不知道它位于何处？如果我受伤并需要医疗干预怎么办？如果我迷路并需要指示怎么办？这是一个有选择性缄默症的孩子的日常困境。
当涉及到焦虑的表达时，儿童似乎有两种不同的反应，这些反应可能源于我们对恐惧刺激的自然战斗或逃避反应。在我们认为危险的情况下，我们的身体做出反应，准备我们战斗，冻结或逃跑（避免）。如果恐惧是真实的（例如，即将发生的车祸或大熊），这种身体准备是有帮助的 - 它会导致我们的肌肉紧张，我们的心率加速，我们的呼吸加快，以及我们想要快速行动。即使我们的生命没有处于危险之中，并且身体准备是不合理的，我们的杏仁核可能会缓慢地“安静地发出”危险信号，我们仍然倾向于采取侵略或避免的行为。大多数有选择性缄默症的孩子在感到焦虑时会做出回避，但少数群体的孩子在被推得太快而无法沟通时，可能会对“战斗”（对立）行为做出反应。
实际上，我在临床环境中看到的许多孩子看起来都很焦虑。它们在接近时会冻结，表现出不良的眼神接触，偶尔会流泪，并避免口头（有时是非言语）交流。不太经常，孩子会表现出焦虑/反对;他们看起来很生气，可能会咕噜咕噜地抨击身体。有时，当我鼓励他们参与学习“勇敢的行为”时，他们甚至可能脸上带着狡猾的笑容并慢慢摇头。例如，我七岁时开始看到的病人完全无法跟我说话对于前几个会议，但是，如果她觉得所有提示进行交流，会大声尖叫，踢，打，并隐藏在桌子下面。我安排她作为当天的最后一次会议，这样她就不会用尖叫声吓唬诊所里的其他病人。尽管外表出现，但她的缄默不是出于蔑视，而是反抗行为（强烈意志，脾气暴躁和身体攻击）是她所经历的极度焦虑的表现。她是一个“斗士”，而不是“逃亡者”。孩子们有可能共同发生反对行为，就像一般人群中的许多孩子有时可能会挑衅一样。事实上，研究表明，在一般人群中，家庭和学校的SM儿童的反对行为率都是模拟的。缄默症不是对立行为的症状。这是焦虑的症状。

THREE SUBSETS OF SELECTIVE MUTISM
New research suggests that there are three different subsets, or classifications, of children with selective mutism (Cohan, 2008). The first group, exclusively “anxious” children with selective mutism, demonstrate freezing behavior, difficulty with both nonverbal and verbal responding and initiating, and significant social anxiety. In initial research, this group appears to be the smallest subset, and they may have the lowest levels of symptom severity. This reduced severity may be a product of the lack of complications such speech/language delays.
The second class, “anxious/oppositional,” is portrayed by defiant behaviors specifically when prompted to speak or engage. This defiance may be exhibited through running, active avoidance, stubbornness, and/or controlling behavior. It is unclear if this behavior is independent of the selective mutism or a result of the anxiety (and subsequent avoidance) stemming from the fear of communicating.
The final class, “anxious/communication-delayed,” exhibit mild to severe communication delays along with clinically significant social anxiety. These children may have expressive and/or receptive language delays. In research, they score higher than the exclusively anxious group in symptom severity and behavioral issues, suggesting that overall this group may be the most severely impaired, and therefore the most complex to treat (Cohan, 2008).
Thus, a full conceptualization of the developmental weaknesses related to selective mutism could look like the following:
选择性缄默症的三种类型
新的研究表明，有选择性缄默症的儿童有三种不同的子集或分类（Cohan，2008）。第一组，完全“焦虑”的儿童选择性缄默症，表现出冷冻行为，非语言和言语反应和启动困难，以及显着的社交焦虑。在最初的研究中，该组似乎是最小的子集，并且它们可能具有最低水平的症状严重性。这种降低的严重程度可能是缺乏诸如语音/语言延迟等并发症的产物。
第二类“焦虑/对立”，特别是在被提示说话或参与时，被挑衅行为所描绘。这种蔑视可以通过跑步，主动回避，顽固和/或控制行为来表现出来。目前尚不清楚这种行为是否独立于选择性缄默症或由于担心交流引起的焦虑（以及随后的避免）。
最后一堂课“焦虑/沟通延迟”表现出轻微至严重的交流延迟以及临床上显着的社交焦虑。这些孩子可能有表达和/或接受性语言延迟。在研究中，他们在症状严重程度和行为问题上得分高于专属焦虑组，这表明整体上这一组可能是最严重受损的，因此治疗最复杂（Cohan，2008）。
因此，与选择性缄默症相关的发展弱点的完整概念可能如下所示：

Developmental Conceptualization of Selective Mutism



HOW DO I KNOW THIS IS SELECTIVE MUTISM, AND NOT JUST SHYNESS?
It is extremely common for children to be hesitant, quiet, and tentative when faced with new and unknown situations and people. For example, if a child is sent to a new school or day camp, we as adults would find it completely within the realm of “normal” for that child to remain quiet for a day or two while he or she adjusted to the new situation and new people. Shy children are typically very observant, taking in all of the new information, processing it, getting their bearings, and slowly opening up. They may be slow to warm up, speak, make eye contact, or engage in activities provided. However, with time they would begin engaging and communicating with peers or adults at a slow, steady pace. These children are typically known as introverted or “slow-to-warm-up.” Introversion is generally considered to be a personality characteristic, resulting in similar behavior in most environments.
A child with selective mutism presents in a different manner. While these children may also be hesitant or inhibited at first, they may eventually engage in a group setting without speaking. They may tell parents that they “love” school, and teachers report that they seem to be enjoying themselves and playing with peers. Some children with selective mutism may not even appear outwardly anxious. However, despite the seeming comfort, there tends to be a consistent pattern of inability to speak in these situations, either to peers, adults, or both. Although the child is interacting well, participating and looking outwardly relaxed, speech does not eventually follow as it would with a “shy” child. Even after the warming-up stage has passed, the child is still unable to speak. The shy child acts in a similar hesitant and inhibited manner across situations, while the child with selective mutism almost appears to have two different personalities—the silent, anxious, inhibited child in certain public situations and the outgoing, charismatic, talkative, moody, and even bossy child when comfortable. Parents frequently discuss with me the frustration of these dual personality characteristics, since the world does not get the opportunity to see their child as they “really are”—fun, outgoing, silly, and smart.
Use of the DSM-5 criteria can also be helpful in distinguishing shyness from selective mutism. Children with temperamental shyness or inhibition would not meet the criteria listed above, and thus their characteristics would be considered within the realm of normal behavior.

我怎么知道这是选择性缄默症，不仅仅是害羞？
当面对新的和未知的情况和人时，孩子们犹豫，安静和试探是非常普遍的。例如，如果孩子被送到新学校或日营，我们作为成年人会发现完全在“正常”范围内，让孩子在适应新情况的同时保持安静一两天和新人。害羞的孩子通常非常敏锐，接受所有新信息，处理它们，获得他们的支持，然后慢慢开放。他们可能会很慢地进行热身，说话，进行目光接触或参与所提供的活动。然而，随着时间的推移，他们将开始以缓慢，稳定的速度与同龄人或成年人交流和沟通。这些孩子通常被称为内向或“慢到热身”。内向通常被认为是一种人格特征，导致在大多数环境中出现类似的行为。
有选择性缄默症的孩子以不同的方式呈现。虽然这些孩子最初也可能会犹豫不决或被抑制，但他们最终可能会在没有说话的情况下参与团体环境。他们可能会告诉父母他们“喜欢”上学，老师报告说他们似乎很享受自己和同龄人一起玩耍。一些有选择性缄默症的孩子可能甚至不会表现出外表焦虑。然而，尽管看似舒适，但在这些情况下，无论是对于同龄人，还是成年人，或两者兼而有之，往往都存在一致的无法说话的模式。尽管孩子的互动性很好，参与并且看起来外表放松，但最终并没有像“害羞”的孩子一样讲话。即使在热身阶段过后，孩子仍然无法说话。害羞的孩子在各种情况下都表现出类似的犹豫和抑制的态度，而有选择性缄默的孩子似乎几乎有两种不同的性格 - 在某些公共场合中的沉默，焦虑，抑制的孩子以及外向，有魅力，健谈，喜怒无常和即使是专横的孩子也很舒服。父母经常与我讨论这些双重人格特征的挫败感，因为世界没有机会看到他们的孩子“真的” - 外表，外向，愚蠢和聪明。
使用DSM-5标准也有助于区分羞怯与选择性缄默症。患有性情羞怯或抑制的儿童不符合上面列出的标准，因此他们的特征将被视为正常行为范围内。

IF IT IS MORE THAN SHYNESS . . . SHOULD WE SEEK TREATMENT?
The average time period between the observation of an “issue” (e.g., the school letting parents know that the child is not speaking in the classroom) and starting treatment (whether that is intervention in the school, parents helping the child practice being brave, or seeking out treatment with a mental health professional) can be months or even years. Some children never actually receive help for their selective mutism. Many factors may lead to this delay in appropriate diagnosis and intervention. Frequently, parents receive advice from others such as: “Don’t worry; she is just shy” or “She will grow out of it.” Still others will tell stories of their own slowness to speak in school (“I did not talk in school until third grade and I am fine”). It can be quite difficult to find treating professionals with knowledge or expertise in selective mutism. As a result, families wait for the child to mature and begin speaking over time or as they feel more comfortable only to realize weeks, months, or years later that no progress is really being made.
Another delaying factor can be that selective mutism is occasionally misdiagnosed as an autism spectrum disorder. Since some of the symptoms of SM mimic the characteristics of autism (e.g., poor eye contact, blank facial expression, awkward/stiff body postures, a lack of speech), it is easy to see why a misdiagnosis could occur. It is notable that when a child with selective mutism presents with autism- like symptoms, these symptoms present only in select settings (specifically when the child is uncomfortable or anxious). This differs from children with primary autism spectrum disorders, who exhibit these behaviors across all settings. See Chapter 3 for a more detailed discussion on differential diagnoses.
Finally, after evaluations have ascertained a diagnosis of SM, many professionals and schools are not sure how to effectively treat selective mutism. There is a plethora of misinformation in the public realm about selective mutism, including the tendency to blame parents or assume that there is a horrible trauma in the past. At a recent workshop, a speech-language pathologist told me a story about her daughter’s experience as a camp counselor. Her daughter had a child in her cabin that, she explained to her mother, had been sexually abused by her father. Her mother, the speech-language pathologist, was aghast to hear this news—she knew the family and would never have predicted that the father would be involved in child abuse. Concerned, she probed further and her daughter explained that the child had selective mutism, and therefore the camp staff assumed that the child’s father must have abused her. Her comment was, “that is what causes selective mutism, right?” This tendency to blame parents or the environment may inhibit parents from seeking help for fear of being blamed or unfairly scrutinized. Other misinformation suggests that taking away all prompts and opportunities to verbalize will allow the child to become comfortable (which will, in turn, lead directly to an increase in talking). As there are few experts in selective mutism and few opportunities for training in the intervention, many adults elect to forgo intervention out of fear that misguided treatments may cause harm.

如果它不仅仅是羞怯。 。 。我们应该寻求治疗吗？
观察“问题”（例如，学校让父母知道孩子不在课堂上讲话）和开始治疗之间的平均时间段（无论是在学校干预，父母帮助孩子练习勇敢，或寻求心理健康专业人员的治疗）可能是几个月甚至几年。有些孩子实际上从未接受过选择性缄默的帮助。许多因素可能导致适当诊断和干预的延迟。父母经常会收到别人的建议，例如：“别担心;她只是害羞“或”她会从中长大。“还有其他人会讲述自己在学校说话的迟缓的故事（”我直到三年级才在学校说话，我很好“）。在选择性缄默症中找到具有知识或专业知识的治疗专业人员可能非常困难。结果，家庭等待孩子成熟并开始说话，或者他们感到更舒服，只是意识到几周，几个月或几年后才真正取得进展。
另一个延迟因素可能是选择性缄默症偶尔被误诊为自闭症谱系障碍。由于SM的一些症状模仿自闭症的特征（例如，眼睛接触不良，面部表情空白，身体姿势笨拙/僵硬，缺乏言语），因此很容易理解为什么会发生误诊。值得注意的是，当患有选择性缄默症的儿童出现自闭症样症状时，这些症状仅出现在选定的环境中（特别是当孩子不舒服或焦虑时）。这与患有原发性自闭症谱系障碍的儿童不同，他们在所有环境中都表现出这些行为。有关差异诊断的更详细讨论，请参见第3章。
最后，在评估确定了SM的诊断后，许多专业人士和学校不确定如何有效地治疗选择性缄默症。在公共领域中存在大量关于选择性缄默的错误信息，包括指责父母或假设过去存在可怕的创伤的倾向。在最近的一次研讨会上，一位语言病理学家告诉我一个关于女儿作为营地辅导员的经历的故事。她的女儿在她的小屋里生了一个孩子，她向她的母亲解释说，她的父亲遭到了性虐待。她的母亲，语言病理学家，听到这个消息感到骇然 - 她知道这个家庭，并且永远不会预测父亲会卷入虐待儿童的行列。令人担忧的是，她进一步探究，她的女儿解释说，孩子有选择性的缄默症，因此营地的工作人员认为孩子的父亲一定是在虐待她。她的评论是，“这就是导致选择性缄默症的原因，对吗？”这种指责父母或环境的倾向可能会抑制父母寻求帮助，因为害怕被指责或受到不公正的审查。其他错误信息表明，取消所有提示和机会语言将使孩子变得舒适（这反过来会直接导致谈话增加）。由于选择性缄默症的专家很少，干预培训的机会很少，许多成年人选择放弃干预，因为担心误导的治疗可能会造成伤害。
SILENCE AS A SAFETY NET
BEHAVIORISM 101
In order to understand the conceptualization of selective mutism, it is necessary to think of behavior in terms of reinforcement and punishment. All behavior is subject to reinforcement (which increases future behavior under similar conditions) and punishment or lack of subsequent reinforcement (which decreases future behavior). Children (and adults) carry out behaviors for a reason. In the vast majority of circumstances, we do not continue a behavior that gives us nothing in return; that is just too much of a waste of time and effort. Instead, we engage in behaviors because there is a reinforcing outcome, or we continue with behaviors because when we do, something negative is taken away. In short—we do things either to get something or to avoid something.

沉默作为安全网
行为主义101
为了理解选择性缄默症的概念化，有必要从强化和惩罚的角度来思考行为。 所有行为都受到强化（这会增加类似条件下的未来行为）和惩罚或缺乏后续强化（这会减少未来的行为）。 儿童（和成人）出于某种原因进行行为。 在绝大多数情况下，我们不会继续采取任何行动，不给予任何回报; 这太浪费时间和精力了。 相反，我们参与行为是因为有一种强化结果，或者我们继续行为，因为当我们这样做时，消极的东西被带走了。 简而言之，我们做的事情要么得到某些东西，要么避免某些事情。

Law of Effect

Law of Effect

If behavior is reinforced, the future rate of behavior will increase in similar conditions. Lack of reinforcement or punishment causes future behavior to decrease.
Behavior -> 	positive/negative reinforcement -> Behavior Increase

Positive reinforcement – The addition of something desired increases a behavior.
Example – A child learning to potty train obtains an M&M® (a desired treat) for each successful trip to the toilet; that child is more likely to use the toilet in the future.
Negative reinforcement – The removal of something aversive increases a behavior. Example – When an adult gets a headache, they take Tylenol®. The medication reduces the headache (an aversive), and next time the adult is more likely to take Tylenol when they have a headache.

Behavior -> 	positive/negative Punishment -> Behavior Decrease

Positive punishment – The addition of something aversive to decrease behavior.
Example – A child curses and his mouth is washed out with soap (an aversive experience). He does not curse again.
*Note – Positive punishment does not work well, particularly with children with selective mutism.*
Negative punishment – The removal of something desired to decrease behavior. Example – A
child is grounded when they hit, which restricts access to fun and enjoyable activities; they are less likely to hit in the future.

效果定律

如果行为得到加强，未来的行为速度将在类似的条件下增加。缺乏
强化或惩罚导致未来行为减少。

行为 - >正/负强化 - >行为增加

积极强化 - 增加所需的东西会增加行为。
示例 - 学习便携式火车的儿童每次成功上厕所都会获得M＆M®（一种理想的零食）; 那个孩子将来更有可能使用厕所。
负强化 - 去除厌恶的东西会增加行为。 示例 - 当成年人头痛时，他们服用Tylenol®。 这种药物减轻了头痛（厌恶），下次成年人头痛时更容易服用泰诺。
行为 - >积极/消极惩罚 - >行为减少

积极的惩罚 - 添加一些厌恶的东西来减少行为。
例子 - 一个孩子诅咒，他被迫用肥皂洗嘴（厌恶经验）。 他不再诅咒
*注意 - 积极惩罚没有效，特别是对有选择性缄默的孩子。*
消极惩罚 - 剥夺喜欢的东西来减少行为。 
示例 - A.
孩子在打人时被关禁闭，这限制了有趣和愉快的活动; 他们将来不太可能打人。


A good example of utilizing positive reinforcement is a household chores chart. If we wanted to increase the likelihood that a child would consistently make his bed, we could provide positive reinforcement, such as praise (verbal reinforcement) or candy/stickers/prizes (tangible rewards) when he made his bed. The effective reward always depends on the child— some children will work hard for a little sticker, while others demand larger tangible prizes or privileges for rewards. Another option would be negative reinforcement, or taking away something perceived to be aversive or undesirable to increase the behavior of making his bed. We could take away another disliked chore contingent on his making his bed (e.g., “If you make your bed, you do not have to do the dishes.”). In general, reinforcement works more quickly and effectively for learning in comparison to punishment. . . and it is more enjoyable for everyone.
利用积极强化的一个很好的例子是家务杂事图表。 如果我们想要增加孩子一直躺在床上的可能性，我们可以提供积极的强化，例如在他铺床时赞美（口头强化）或糖果/贴纸/奖品（有形奖励）。 有效的奖励总是取决于孩子 - 有些孩子会努力争取一点贴纸，而其他孩子需要更大的有形奖励或奖励特权。 另一种选择是消极强化，或者带走被认为厌恶或不受欢迎的东西以增加制作他的床的行为。 我们可以在他铺床时带走另一个不喜欢的苦差事（例如，“如果你铺床，你就不必做菜了。”）。 一般而言，与惩罚相比，强化对于学习更快速有效。。。 这对每个人来说都更加愉快。
CONCEPTUALIZING SELECTIVE MUTISM
Selective mutism is understood as a pattern of avoidance of anxiety-provoking situations, accidentally strengthened through negative reinforcement.
Behavioral Conceptualization of Selective Mutism

选择性缄默症的概念化
选择性缄默被理解为避免引发焦虑情绪的模式，通过消极强化意外加强。
选择性缄默症的行为概念化
The cycle begins with a child who likely has a genetic loading for anxiety and perhaps biological tendencies to become very over-aroused and anxious when in situations where communication is demanded. The child may also have a language delay, auditory processing weakness, or other commonly co-occurring complication. The child is then exposed to expectations for communication (e.g., a question from a teacher). The child attempts to avoid the communication or interaction (top of the diagram). Avoidance is a natural reaction to anxiety (think of the fight-or-flight response to anxiety—the child is fleeing from the expectation to speak). When the child avoids the interaction, it is socially uncomfortable for others to wait for a response and someone generally jumps in to “rescue” or speak for the child. This could be a teacher, parent, peer, or sibling. When the expectation for communication is suddenly removed, the child (and the others involved in the interaction) feels much better; anxiety and discomfort is removed (bottom of the diagram). This reduction of anxiety accidentally reinforces the behavior, and so the next time the child is in a similar situation, they are more likely to avoid verbal communication.
Referencing the information on reinforcement versus punishment above, we can see that this is an example of negative reinforcement—the action of taking away aversive or noxious stimuli (anxiety) when someone rescues the child negatively reinforces the child’s avoidant behavior. Others around the child learn through reinforcement, too, and are more likely to quickly jump in and “rescue” the child by speaking for them or reducing expectations for communication. This “rescuing” may take the form of speaking for the child or reducing the number of direct questions or prompts for speech given. Peers may begin to state, “Johnny doesn’t talk” before the child even has an opportunity to respond.
We hypothesize that the beginnings of this pattern of behavior are entirely driven by anxiety—the child becomes too anxious and does not speak. However, over time the behavior of avoiding speech may be motivated less by overwhelming anxiety and may function more as a learned avoidance mechanism. Thus, the child experiences less anxiety as he becomes more skilled at avoiding verbal communication.
Consider a real-life example. A child is at the store with her mother. They are approached by another adult, who compliments the child on her outfit. Both the parent and the adult turn to the child, expecting her (as is socially appropriate) to say, “thank you.” Instead, what do we see with a child with selective mutism? She likely hides her face, steps behind her mother, and is silent. At this point, someone rescues the child from that awkward silence—either the mother says, “thank you” for the child, or the adult may say something like, “Oh, I see she is just shy.” The child now is relieved of the expectation to talk, and the mother and other adult are relieved of the socially uncomfortable silence and obvious anxiety of the child. All are negatively reinforced (by the removal of the aversive anxious feeling), and the pattern of behavior continues.
It is important that parents and other adults are not considered at fault for their “rescuing” behavior. No right-minded parent or adult enjoys watching a child squirm in anxious situations, and understandably it is our general response to attempt to make situations less anxiety-provoking for children whenever possible. This occurs out of caring and empathy for the child. We become quite good at stepping in and “saving” the child from the anxiety—at some point we as adults also learn to avoid altogether what causes the child anxiety. We stop asking the child questions, pass over them in circle time, and do not place them in group projects with peers. We complete tasks for the child, communicate for them (this is extremely common), rearrange a setting to accommodate the lack of speech, and allow whispers and nonverbal communication to take the place of speaking. Soon, not only is the child avoiding the anxiety—so are the adults around them. This becomes a concerning situation—the child has no reason or opportunity to become verbal. While the likelihood of a child with selective mutism answering a question or participating verbally may be small, if there are no opportunities given by adults to participate or verbalize, the chance of the child with SM asserting themselves and speaking is absolutely zero.
这个周期开始于一个孩子，他可能有焦虑的遗传负荷，也许在需要交流的情况下，生物倾向会变得非常过度激动和焦虑。孩子也可能有语言延迟，听觉处理弱点或其他常见的并发症。然后，孩子接触到对交流的期望（例如，来自教师的问题）。孩子试图避免沟通或互动（图的顶部）。避免是对焦虑的自然反应（想想对焦虑的战斗或逃避反应 - 孩子正在逃避期望发言）。当孩子避免互动时，其他人等待回应是社会上的不舒服，并且有人通常会跳入“救援”或为孩子说话。这可以是教师，父母，同伴或兄弟姐妹。当突然消除对沟通的期望时，孩子（以及参与互动的其他人）感觉好多了;焦虑和不适被消除（图的底部）。这种焦虑的减少意外地强化了这种行为，因此下一次孩子处于类似情况时，他们更有可能避免口头交流。
参考上面关于强化与惩罚的信息，我们可以看出这是负面强化的一个例子 - 当有人拯救孩子消极地强化孩子的回避行为时，消除厌恶或有害刺激（焦虑）的行为。孩子周围的其他人也通过强化来学习，并且更有可能通过为他们说话或减少对沟通的期望来快速跳入并“拯救”孩子。这种“救援”可以采取为孩子说话的形式，或者减少直接问题的数量或提示给出的言语。在孩子甚至有机会回应之前，同伴们可能会开始说“约翰尼不会说话”。
我们假设这种行为模式的开始完全由焦虑驱动 - 孩子变得过于焦虑而不会说话。然而，随着时间的推移，避免言语的行为可以通过压倒性的焦虑来减少，并且可以更多地作为学习的回避机制起作用。因此，当他变得更擅长避免言语交流时，孩子经历较少的焦虑。
考虑一个现实生活中的例子。一个孩子和她妈妈在商店里。另一位成年人接近他们，他们在她的衣服上称赞孩子。父母和成年人都转向孩子，期待她（在社会上适当）说“谢谢你。”相反，我们对有选择性缄默症的孩子有什么看法？她可能隐藏她的脸，在母亲身后踩了一下，然后沉默了。在这一点上，有人从那个尴尬的沉默中救出孩子 - 无论是母亲为孩子说“谢谢”，还是成年人可能会说“哦，我看她只是害羞。”孩子现在松了一口气期待谈话，母亲和其他成年人都被解除了孩子的社会不安的沉默和明显的焦虑。所有这些都被消极地强化（通过消除厌恶的焦虑感），并且行为模式仍在继续。
父母和其他成年人因“抢救”行为而被认为是错误的。没有正确的父母或成年人喜欢在焦虑的情况下看着孩子蠕动，可以理解的是，我们的一般反应就是尽可能减少对儿童的焦虑。这是出于对孩子的关怀和同情。我们擅长踩踏并“拯救”孩子免于焦虑 - 在某些时候我们成年人也学会完全避免导致孩子焦虑的原因。我们不再询问孩子的问题，在圈子时间内将其传递给他们，并且不要将他们放在与同龄人一起的小组项目中。我们为孩子完成任务，为他们沟通（这是非常常见的），重新安排设置以适应缺乏言语，并允许低语和非语言交流取代说话。很快，孩子不仅避免了焦虑 - 周围的成年人也是如此。这成为一种令人担忧的情况 - 孩子没有理由或机会成为口头上的。虽然有选择性缄默的孩子回答问题或口头参与的可能性很小，但如果成年人没有机会参与或言语，那么SM主张自己和说话的孩子的机会绝对是零。


As this pattern of behavior continues (i.e., the child avoids, someone steps in and saves, avoidance is reinforced by reduced anxiety for all involved), both adults and peers become very practiced and successful in rescuing roles. Imagine how frequently this pattern of behavior occurs. How many times per day are you prompted to speak, including answering questions, talking on the phone, initiating to others, requesting information, or maintaining a conversation? It might be hundreds of times per day. If we are conservative, we could hypothesize that a typical child is engaged verbally approximately 100 times per day. That is 700 opportunities to practice this behavioral pattern each week, 3,000 opportunities per month, and 36,500 practice opportunities each year. If you practiced anything that frequently, you would get quite good at it, and it would come naturally. The children engaging in this behavioral pattern obtain plenty of practice avoiding and therefore develop compensatory behaviors, such as getting needs met through nonverbal communication, miming, or whisper buddies (i.e., friends who tell others what the child wants or needs). Adults receive plenty of practice speaking and answering for the child and saving them from anxiety-provoking situations. This tendency to save the child from the anxiety is not a result of disordered family dynamics or parental pathology. It is a natural response from those who care about the child. While it is out of love and care that adults and peers protect the child from anxiety, this also accidentally causes those same anxieties to persist and even worsen with time.
As noted before, some individuals view the avoidance of speaking as defiance, control, or manipulation. Children with SM may not look particularly anxious because they are successfully avoiding an anxiety-provoking interaction; occasionally the child may even appear defiant to an observer. Although the symptoms may look like defiance, the avoidance related to selective mutism is a naturally occurring reaction to anxiety, not unlike other phobias. For example, I have to admit that I have an intense fear of roller coasters. This fear has only become more poignant as I have aged and my stomach is not as strong as it used to be. When I am in the vicinity of roller coasters, my fight or flight mechanism kicks in, and I do everything in my power to avoid riding them. My husband would literally have to take me kicking and screaming to the line. I would look VERY defiant and oppositional if I was asked to directly face my biggest fear by riding a roller-coaster. I do not generally look anxious to the passerby on a normal day, as I am rarely near roller coasters (I have developed quite a well-practiced avoidance pattern). My seeming oppositionality in that scenario is not born of a defiant personality—it is the result of my avoidant reaction to anxiety. Such is the occasionally oppositional reaction to speaking of kids with SM.
随着这种行为模式的继续（即，孩子避免，有人介入并保存，通过减少所有参与者的焦虑来避免回避），成人和同伴都成为非常实践并成功地拯救角色。想象一下这种行为模式发生的频率。您被提示每天发言多少次，包括回答问题，通话，发送给他人，请求信息或维持对话？它可能每天数百次。如果我们保守，我们可以假设一个典型的孩子每天口头约100次。每周有700个机会来实践这种行为模式，每月有3,000个机会，每年有36,500个练习机会。如果你经常练习任何东西，你会很擅长它，而且它会很自然。参与这种行为模式的儿童获得了大量的避免练习，因此发展出补偿性行为，例如通过非语言交流，模仿或低语的朋友（即告诉他人孩子想要或需要的朋友）来满足需求。成年人可以为孩子进行大量的练习说话和回答，并使他们免于焦虑不安的情况。这种拯救孩子免于焦虑的倾向不是家庭动态障碍或父母病理的结果。这是关心孩子的人的自然反应。虽然成年人和同伴保护孩子免于焦虑是出于爱和关心，但这也意外地导致同样的焦虑持续甚至随着时间的推移而恶化。
如前所述，有些人认为避免说话是蔑视，控制或操纵。患有SM的儿童可能看起来并不特别焦虑，因为他们成功地避免了引起焦虑的互动;偶尔孩子甚至可能对观察者表现出挑衅。尽管症状可能看起来像是蔑视，但与选择性缄默症有关的避免是对焦虑的自然反应，与其他恐惧症不同。例如，我不得不承认我对过山车的强烈恐惧。这种恐惧只会变得更加尖锐，因为我已经老了，我的胃不像以前那么强壮。当我在过山车附近时，我的战斗或飞行机制开始行动，我尽我所能避免骑它们。我的丈夫真的不得不带我踢和尖叫到线。如果我被要求通过坐过山车直接面对我最大的恐惧，我会看起来非常挑衅和反对。在平常的一天，我一般都不会对路人感到焦虑，因为我很少靠近过山车（我已经开发了很好的避免模式）。在那种情况下，我看似的对立性并非源于一个挑衅的人格 - 这是我对焦虑的回避反应的结果。对于说SM的孩子来说，偶尔会有反对的反应。


IMPACT ON PARENTS, SIBLINGS, PEERS, AND SCHOOL PERSONNEL
In my office, parents most commonly discuss concerns about their child’s anxiety and how they wish there was a way for their child to “let go, enjoy life, and be themselves.” If they are truly honest, many parents admit feelings of anger, frustration, confusion, and embarrassment, particularly concerning their child’s behavior in public. They do not know how to respond when the child cannot answer a polite stranger who compliments them. They get (generally unwanted) advice from well-meaning family members about parenting skills and the need to just “be tough” with the child, thereby forcing them to talk. Most importantly, parents often do not know how to help their child practice being brave.
Interestingly, polite words are often the hardest words for children with SM to say, and this adds to the embarrassment of parents. Hi, goodbye, sorry, please, thank you, and excuse me are incredibly difficult and prompting the child to say these words almost always leads to immediate avoidance. This may be because of the extensive practice of avoidance of polite phrases—these are the words all parents prompt their child to say on a regular basis, and therefore these kids have garnered much practice avoiding these prompts. Furthermore, children with selective mutism may fear that using these words with others opens the door to a conversation or increased interactions. I often encourage parents not to prompt their child to say these words any longer when starting treatment. We can make them a focus or a goal at a later date.
Siblings are impacted by SM as well. At times, more than one sibling may exhibit characteristics of SM (particularly identical twins). This makes sense, since we know that anxiety has a genetic predisposition and one sibling may be modeling avoidance for the others. Alternatively, siblings may begin to talk for the child with selective mutism, answering questions and developing a particularly outgoing and assertive personality to make up for their sister’s or brother’s quiet nature. They may even step in and “rescue” the child from scenarios where there is a prompt to speak.
Peers are usually quite socially accepting of children with SM in younger grades and will continue to play and interact even when the child with SM does not respond verbally to them. However, as children age, the characteristics of SM (i.e., difficulty responding and initiating verbally and nonverbally, possible social anxiety, an inability to play a role in group projects, etc.) begin to alienate children with SM from their peers. The number of their friendships may begin to decrease as friendships evolve from interactive play to a relationship cultivated by communication and joint understanding. As they age, peers become less understanding of the individual with SM and begin to exclude them from activities. If left untreated, children with SM in later years have a higher likelihood of eventually becoming social outcasts—the kid in class who no one really remembers, socializes with, or invites to activities.
Teachers and school personnel frequently have reactions similar to those of parents—they vacillate between a concern for what the child is experiencing, a fear of “breaking” or “ruining” them through an anxiety-provoking experience, and frustration, anger, and confusion as to how to help. Selective mutism can be particularly perplexing for teachers when they are held responsible for assessing the child’s knowledge and involving the child in classroom activities. Furthermore, many teachers admit to natural feelings of hurt when the child does not talk to them. It is easy to take it personally when a child with SM cannot talk to you, but it may have absolutely nothing to do with you and/or your personality. There seem to be unspoken “rules” concerning who children with SM talk to, in what environment, and under what circumstances. Many times, the children themselves cannot explain or identify these “rules,” but they are apparent in the child’s behavior. They may talk to friends at soccer, but not at school. They may talk to mom and dad while walking up to the school grounds, but after stepping onto the sidewalk they stop responding verbally. Some children will talk to certain teachers but not others. There seems to be very little rhyme or reason to these “rules” and boundaries, and they can be frustrating to peers and teachers alike. Friends may become hurt when the child with SM stops speaking to them suddenly when they move to a different environment. The kindest teacher in the school may feel upset when the child cannot talk to her, but will talk to the gruff, grumpy janitor. We must understand that there are factors that we are not aware of, and that the child is not aware of, that are influencing their ability to talk. It is not the fault of the child or the potential communication partner, but just a manifestation of the anxiety the child feels that we do not fully comprehend.
对父母，兄弟姐妹，同龄人和学校人员的影响
在我的办公室里，父母最常讨论对孩子焦虑的担忧以及他们希望孩子如何“放手，享受生活，成为自己”。如果他们真诚，许多父母都会承认愤怒，沮丧，困惑和尴尬，特别是关于他们孩子在公共场合的行为。当孩子无法回答那些赞美他们的礼貌陌生人时，他们不知道如何回应。他们从善意的家庭成员那里得到（通常是不需要的）关于养育技能的建议，以及对孩子“强硬”的需要，从而迫使他们说话。最重要的是，父母通常不知道如何帮助他们的孩子练习勇敢。
有趣的是，对于有SM的孩子说，礼貌用语通常是最难的词，这增加了父母的尴尬。嗨，再见，对不起，拜托，谢谢，请原谅我是非常困难的，并促使孩子说这些话几乎总能导致立即避免。这可能是因为避免使用礼貌用语的广泛做法 - 所有这些都是父母提示孩子定期说话的话，因此这些孩子已经获得了许多避免这些提示的练习。此外，有选择性缄默症的儿童可能担心与他人一起使用这些词语会打开谈话或增加互动的大门。我经常鼓励父母在开始治疗时不要让孩子再说这些话。我们可以在以后将它们作为焦点或目标。
兄弟姐妹也受到SM的影响。有时，不止一个兄弟姐妹可能表现出SM的特征（特别是同卵双胞胎）。这是有道理的，因为我们知道焦虑具有遗传倾向，而一个兄弟可能会为其他人建模避免。或者，兄弟姐妹可能会开始为选择性缄默症的孩子说话，回答问题并培养一种特别外向和自信的性格来弥补他们姐妹或兄弟的安静。他们甚至可以介入并从有提示说话的场景中“拯救”孩子。
同龄人通常在社交上接受年龄较小的SM儿童，并且即使患有SM的孩子没有口头回应，他们也会继续玩耍和互动。然而，随着儿童年龄的增长，SM的特征（即，难以应对和开始口头和非语言，可能的社交焦虑，无法在小组项目中发挥作用等）开始疏远SM患儿与同龄人。随着友谊从互动游戏发展到通过沟通和共同理解培养的关系，他们的友谊数量可能会开始减少。随着年龄的增长，同龄人越来越不了解SM的个体并开始将他们排除在活动之外。如果不及时治疗，后来SM患儿最终成为社会弃儿的可能性更高 - 课堂上没有人真正记得，社交或邀请参加活动的孩子。
教师和学校工作人员经常会有与父母相似的反应 - 他们在关注孩子正在经历的事情，害怕通过焦虑的经历“打破”或“破坏”他们，以及沮丧，愤怒和困惑之间摇摆不定至于如何提供帮助。当教师负责评估孩子的知识并让孩子参与课堂活动时，选择性缄默可能会特别令教师感到困惑。此外，当孩子不与他们交谈时，许多老师承认自然受伤。当有SM的孩子无法与您交谈时，很容易接受它，但它可能与您和/或您的个性完全无关。关于SM的孩子与谁交谈，在什么环境以及在什么情况下，似乎都有不言而喻的“规则”。很多时候，孩子们自己无法解释或识别这些“规则”，但他们在孩子的行为中很明显。他们可以和足球的朋友聊天，但不能在学校聊天。他们可以在走到学校场地的同时与妈妈和爸爸交谈，但在踩到人行道上之后他们会口头上回应。有些孩子会和某些老师交谈但不会和其他老师交谈这些“规则”和界限似乎很少有韵律或理由，对同龄人和老师来说都是令人沮丧的。当有SM的孩子在搬到不同的环境时突然对他们说话时，朋友可能会受伤。当孩子不能跟她说话时，学校里最善良的老师可能会感到沮丧，但会和那个脾气暴躁，脾气暴躁的看门人说话。我们必须明白，有些因素我们并不知道，而且孩子并不知道这些因素会影响他们的谈话能力。这不是孩子或潜在的沟通伙伴的错，而只是孩子对我们不完全理解的焦虑的表现。

IMPLICATIONS OF THE AVOIDANCE PATTERN
The continued avoidance of speech in public scenarios has long-lasting academic, social, and behavioral outcomes. Children with SM tend to be well-behaved and are generally not disruptive even when unable to participate in class. However, teachers in today’s schools are trained to engage students in activities such as team-learning projects, oral presentations, partner reading, and group discussion. Classes promote not only listening but also speaking, reading, and participation, the bases of language comprehension and production. Thus, there are numerous long-lasting academic implications for kids with SM who are unable to participate in these educational skill-building activities. First, they are difficult to assess or test, particularly in reading. Because of the lack of speech, teachers and other school personnel may be unable to evaluate the child’s understanding of a concept, resulting in decreased opportunities to give corrective feedback. Second, the children may be unable to participate in group projects or activities. Many problem-solving techniques, including learning to compromise and work effectively with others, are learned within the context of group projects. Third, the children do not have the opportunity to practice oral presentations, show-and-tell, or public speaking. Finally, the children do not have the ability to ask a question or clarify information if they do not understand. For example, consider how math builds consistently on past knowledge. If a child does not understand a specific mathematical skill and is unable to ask for help or request that the teacher explain further, that child will likely fall behind in later math concepts. As the child struggles to demonstrate the knowledge they are acquiring, a gap opens between abilities and achievements (Sharoni, 2012).
In addition to academic implications, there are many social implications for children with SM. There are not higher rates of bullying concerning these children, but there may be difficulty making and keeping friends. Children with selective mutism, as they age, simply begin to fade into the social background. Even in early elementary school, kids with SM are treated differently. They may be treated as if they are younger or less capable than they really are by peers (who have the wonderful intention of “helping” them but accidentally reduce expectations and their opportunities to be verbal). Some are popular, but classmates assume a protective role and, despite the peers’ good intentions, this protection accidentally preserves the problem. The child with SM frequently becomes known as “the kid that doesn’t talk.”
Finally, there are behavioral implications in public and in extracurricular activities. Children with SM may be restricted in their participation in extracurricular activities if these activities have verbal demands that can’t be met by the child. More frightening is the thought that children with selective mutism cannot cry out for help if they are in danger or alert an adult if they are hurt or in trouble. One of my patients fell into a ditch on the way home from school. She injured her leg and ankle and could not escape from the ditch because it was too high to climb out. Because she was unable to cry out for help, she lay there for several hours before a search team found her. If she had been able to speak, she would have been heard almost immediately as there were several people within shouting distance.
If left untreated, there are many possible negative outcomes as the SM progresses (Steinhausen, 2005). The child is at a much higher risk for later generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobias, and major depressive disorder. They have a higher incidence of refusing to attend school and poor school performance as they become older. In adulthood, they are more likely to self-medicate with alcohol and marijuana and more likely to choose careers that do not demand frequent socialization. Since selective mutism is considered a disorder of childhood, adults with these symptoms may be diagnosed with severe social anxiety or avoidant personality disorder. These serious implications demonstrate the need for early intervention. If we intervene early and effectively, we can avoid the negative impact on the child and those around him/her.
Unfortunately, attempting to obtain early intervention can be confusing and misinformation is prevalent. Some of the literature and websites on selective mutism recommend that adults do not try to encourage the child to talk at all—that when all pressure is removed, the child will spontaneously begin speaking. Research does not support this premise that a total lack of intervention leads to verbalizations. It also does not make sense in the framework of conceptualizing selective mutism as a type of phobia. If you avoid any interaction with the object or event causing you anxiety, do you suddenly become brave and no longer frightened? No.
Consider the following example. Joey is afraid of dogs; because of his fear, Joey’s family and friends organize his daily life to avoid dogs altogether. The family stops going to houses of friends who have dogs. They throw away all books and videos featuring dogs. They even stop going on walks because of the potential of seeing a dog. Will Joey suddenly stop being afraid of dogs and decide they are wonderful pets? Will he say to his parents, “that fear of dogs was silly? I love dogs now”? Of course not. In fact, his fear may become more ingrained because he has not had any opportunity to experience dogs as non-threatening. The idea of dogs as dangerous will remain fixed.
In order to address and reduce his fear of dogs, his friends and family would need to slowly and gently introduce him to dogs that are safe, during which time he could begin to develop a different conceptualization of dogs. Instead of all dogs being seen as threatening, Joey would begin to see that some dogs are safe for interaction. Approaching a child’s fear this way helps them gain practice in facing their fears at a reasonable pace. In much the same way, if we remove all exposure to communication and all intervention encouraging the child to speak, it is extremely unlikely that they will suddenly talk.
Using the “wait and see” approach with children who have selective mutism can be very detrimental because of the way selective mutism develops—through a continuous pattern of avoiding communication. An approach that is inactive and allows that pattern to continue occurring only strengthens the pattern of avoidance. Therefore, each day that goes by in which the child does not work to practice new “brave behaviors” and instead continues the practice of avoidance is not neutral. Allowing the pattern of avoidance to continue makes it increasingly difficult to break.
Imagine being known as “the kid who doesn’t talk.” How challenging would it be to just start talking? Others will likely overreact to your first words, an outcome which kids with SM dread. “You talk. Say it again, say it again.” Intervening early saves children from being defined by this persona —“the child who doesn’t talk”—and reduces the response of others when they eventually communicate. Early intervention also assists in developing self-efficacy—the feeling that they are capable of being brave, making changes in their behavior, and reaching goals. Most of the children with SM describe a desire to talk; if we help them do so, they experience clear feelings of success. In a recent session, a first grader with SM and I were chatting, and in passing I asked her why she thought it was so easy to talk to me in my office but hard to talk to people in school. “Because you make me talk.” she replied with a smile. Chuckling, I asked her if perhaps everyone at school should “make” her talk. “Yes, I wish they would.” she responded. She desperately wants to talk to others, but simply cannot get the words out.
We as parents, teachers, school professionals, and mental health professionals want children to be successful and happy. Children with untreated selective mutism are likely not reaching this potential. We MUST intervene early to provide the best future outcomes.

避免模​​式的含义
在公共场景中继续避免言论具有长期的学术，社会和行为结果。患有SM的儿童往往表现良好，即使无法参加课堂也不会造成破坏。但是，今天学校的教师接受培训，让学生参与团队学习项目，口头报告，合作伙伴阅读和小组讨论等活动。课程不仅促进听力，还促进口语，阅读和参与，语言理解和生产的基础。因此，对于无法参加这些教育技能培养活动的SM儿童，有许多长期的学术含义。首先，它们很难评估或测试，特别是在阅读方面。由于缺乏言语，教师和其他学校工作人员可能无法评估孩子对概念的理解，导致提供纠正反馈的机会减少。其次，孩子可能无法参加团体项目或活动。许多解决问题的技术，包括学习妥协和与他人有效合作，都是在小组项目的背景下学习的。第三，孩子们没有机会练习口头陈述，表演和讲述或公开演讲。最后，如果孩子不理解，他们就没有能力提问或澄清信息。例如，考虑数学如何在过去的知识上建立一致。如果孩子不了解特定的数学技能并且无法寻求帮助或要求老师进一步解释，那么该孩子可能会在后来的数学概念中落后。当孩子努力展示他们所获得的知识时，能力和成就之间会出现差距（Sharoni，2012）。
除学术影响外，SM患儿还有许多社会影响。关于这些孩子的欺凌率并不高，但是制造和保持朋友可能有困难。随着年龄的增长，选择性缄默症的儿童开始逐渐淡出社会背景。即使在小学初期，有SM的孩子也会受到不同的待遇。他们可能被视为比同龄人更年轻或更少能力（他们的意图是“帮助”他们但却意外地降低了期望和他们的口头机会）。有些很受欢迎，但是同学们扮演着保护角色，尽管有同伴的良好意愿，但这种保护意外地保留了这个问题。患有SM的孩子经常被称为“不会说话的孩子”。
最后，在公共场合和课外活动中存在行为影响。如果这些活动具有儿童无法满足的口头要求，那么SM患儿可能会受限于参加课外活动。更可怕的是，有选择性缄默症的孩子如果处于危险之中就不能大声呼救，或者如果他们受伤或遇到麻烦就会提醒成年人。我的一名病人在放学回家的路上掉进了沟里。她腿部和脚踝受伤，无法逃离沟渠，因为太高而无法爬出去。因为她无法呼救，所以她在搜索小组找到她之前躺了几个小时。如果她能够说话，她几乎会立即被听到，因为有几个人在呼喊距离内。
如果不及时治疗，随着SM的进展，有许多可能的负面结果（Steinhausen，2005）。儿童患后期广泛性焦虑症，特定恐惧症和重度抑郁症的风险要高得多。随着年龄的增长，他们拒绝上学和学校表现不佳的发生率更高。在成年期，他们更有可能使用酒精和大麻进行自我治疗，更有可能选择不需要频繁社交的职业。由于选择性缄默症被认为是儿童期疾病，具有这些症状的成年人可能被诊断患有严重的社交焦虑或回避性人格障碍。这些严重影响表明需要早期干预。如果我们及早有效地进行干预，我们就可以避免对孩子及其周围的人产生负面影响。
不幸的是，试图获得早期干预可能会令人困惑，并且错误信息很普遍。一些关于选择性缄默症的文献和网站建议成年人不要试图鼓励孩子说话 - 当所有压力消除后，孩子会自发地开始说话。研究不支持这一前提，即完全缺乏干预会导致言语化。在将选择性缄默症概念化为一种恐惧症的框架中，它也没有意义。如果你避免与导致焦虑的物体或事件的任何互动，你会突然变得勇敢而不再受到惊吓吗？没有。
请考虑以下示例。乔伊害怕狗;由于他的恐惧，乔伊的家人和朋友组织他的日常生活，以避免狗完全。这家人不再去找有狗的朋友的房子。他们扔掉所有带狗的书籍和视频。他们甚至因为看到狗的潜力而停止散步。 Joey会突然停止害怕狗并决定他们是很棒的宠物吗？他会对他的父母说：“对狗的恐惧是愚蠢的吗？我现在爱狗了吗？当然不是。事实上，他的恐惧可能会变得更加根深蒂固，因为他没有任何机会将狗视为非威胁性的。狗是危险的想法将保持固定。
为了解决和减少他对狗的恐惧，他的朋友和家人需要慢慢地，温和地将他介绍给安全的狗，在此期间他可以开始对狗进行不同的概念化。而不是所有的狗被视为威胁，乔伊会开始看到一些狗是安全的互动。以这种方式接近孩子的恐惧有助于他们以合理的速度练习面对恐惧。以同样的方式，如果我们消除所有接触沟通和鼓励孩子说话的所有干预，他们就不太可能突然说话。
对选择性缄默的孩子使用“观望”方法可能是非常有害的，因为选择性缄默的发展方式 - 通过避免交流的连续模式。一种不活跃的方法并允许该模式继续发生只会加强避免模式。因此，孩子不去练习新的“勇敢行为”而不是继续避免行为的每一天都不是中立的。允许避免模式继续使得它越来越难以打破。
想象一下被称为“不会说话的孩子。”开始说话有多难？其他人可能会对你的第一句话反应过度，这是孩子们对SM的恐惧。 “你说。再说一遍，再说一遍。“早期干预可以避免孩子被这个角色定义 - ”不会说话的孩子“ - 当他们最终交流时减少他人的反应。早期干预也有助于培养自我效能感 - 他们能够勇敢，改变行为，达到目标的感觉。大多数患有SM的孩子都有说话的欲望;如果我们帮助他们这样做，他们会有明确的成功感受。在最近的一次会议上，一位有SM和我的一年级学生正在聊天，顺便说一句，我问她为什么在我的办公室里跟我说话很容易，但很难和学校里的人交谈。 “因为你让我说话。”她笑着回答。笑着，我问她，也许学校里的每个人都应该“说”她的谈话。 “是的，我希望他们愿意。”她回应道。她拼命想与别人交谈，但根本无法说出来。
我们作为父母，教师，学校专业人士和心理健康专业人士希望孩子们获得成功和快乐。未经治疗的选择性缄默症的儿童可能无法达到这种潜力。我们必须尽早介入，以提供最佳的未来结果。

CHAPTER 3
ASSESSING FOR SELECTIVE MUTISM
It may appear that a diagnosis of selective mutism is easy to make: If a child talks at home and does not talk at school or in public, they probably have selective mutism. The process of substantiating a diagnosis, sifting through related issues, and determining the best course of action can be much more complex. Like any psychological diagnosis, consideration of selective mutism involves researching the child and the family. However, unlike other diagnoses that may not take into consideration environmental factors, the diagnosis of selective mutism necessitates a thorough investigation of the child’s school and public life. Assessing for selective mutism (and ruling out other disorders) is a four- step process:
1. Diagnostic interview with parents/teacher/caregivers 
2. Questionnaires 
3. Observation of the child in different environments and in the presence of different individuals 
4. Rule out related or co-occurring disorders or weaknesses

第3章
评估选择性缄默症
似乎很容易做出选择性缄默症的诊断：如果一个孩子在家里说话并且不在学校或公共场合说话，他们可能会有选择性的缄默症。 证实诊断，筛选相关问题以及确定最佳行动方案的过程可能要复杂得多。 像任何心理诊断一样，选择性缄默症的考虑涉及研究儿童和家庭。 然而，与其他可能未考虑环境因素的诊断不同，选择性缄默症的诊断需要对儿童的学校和公共生活进行彻底调查。 评估选择性缄默症（并排除其他疾病）的过程分为四个步骤：
1.与父母/教师/护理人员进行诊断性访谈
2.问卷调查
3.在不同环境和不同个体面前观察孩子
4.排除相关或共存的疾病或弱点

DIAGNOSTIC INTERVIEW
A diagnostic interview is the first and most important piece of evidence in making a case for selective mutism. First, the clinician must determine the exact circumstances of the current behavior (not speaking). Through interviews with parents, teachers, and caregivers, the following information, in detail, must be obtained:
Who does the child currently talk to? Who are they unable to talk to (e.g., who are the people regularly in their lives with whom they cannot yet verbally communicate)? Who are they most likely or most interested in communicating with and who are they least likely or interested in communicating with?
What incentivizes the child to communicate, or in what circumstances would they be most likely to talk? If they need something? If someone asks them a direct question? If they are interacting one-on- one with an adult? If approached by a peer? It is likely that there are particular activities in which the child is more likely to talk (e.g., while engaged in a fun play activity as opposed to answering a question in front of the class).
Where is the child able to speak? Only at home? In public to parents if no one is watching or listening? On the playground, but not in the classroom?
How does the child communicate? Gestures? Writing? Sounds? Whispering? Short responses?
The more detail obtained during the interview, the more specific the treatment plan will be. For example, it would be a waste of time and energy to focus treatment on something the child is already easily able to do, such as responding to the parent in a store. Relatedly, we may not expect the child to speak immediately to the teacher’s assistant if the child has never done so before. For an example of a diagnostic interview, see page 107. Please note that the diagnostic interview is best conducted as an interactive, in-person interview, and not given as a questionnaire for parents to complete independently. This will allow the interviewer to follow up in obtaining more detail about the child’s modes of communicating.
诊断访谈
诊断性访谈是提出选择性缄默症的第一个也是最重要的证据。首先，临床医生必须确定当前行为的确切情况（不说话）。通过与父母，教师和看护人的访谈，必须获得以下详细信息：
孩子目前与谁交谈？谁不能与他们交谈（例如，谁是他们生活中经常与他们无法口头沟通的人）？谁最有可能或最有兴趣与谁沟通，谁最不可能或有兴趣与谁沟通？
是什么激励孩子进行交流，或者他们最有可能在什么情况下交谈？如果他们需要什么？如果有人问他们一个直接的问题？如果他们与成年人进行一对一的互动？如果是同伴接近？可能存在儿童更有可能说话的特定活动（例如，在参与有趣的游戏活动时，而不是在课堂前回答问题）。
孩子在哪里可以说话？只在家里？如果没有人在观看或收听，在公开场合向父母公开？在操场上，但不是在教室里？
孩子如何沟通？手势？写作？听起来？耳语？简短回答？
面试期间获得的细节越多，治疗计划就越具体。例如，将治疗集中在孩子已经能够轻易做到的事情上，例如回应商店中的父母，将浪费时间和精力。相关地，如果孩子以前从未这样做过，我们可能不会期望孩子立即与老师的助手说话。有关诊断性访谈的示例，请参阅第107页。请注意，诊断性访谈最好是作为交互式的面对面访谈进行，而不是作为父母独立完成的调查问卷。这将使面试官能够跟进，以获得有关孩子沟通方式的更多细节。
QUESTIONNAIRES AND RATING SCALES
Following a complete diagnostic interview, questionnaires and rating scales can compare children to “typically developing peers” in the realm of selective mutism symptoms as well as related anxiety symptoms. There is currently only one published questionnaire specific to selective mutism—the Selective Mutism Questionnaire (Bergman, 2008). The Selective Mutism Questionnaire (SMQ) was developed to obtain information about the child’s communication across three main settings—home, school, and public. The SMQ is a 17-item parent report questionnaire normed for children ages 3-11. Parents are asked to rate their child’s frequency of speech in several different settings and with different possible conversational partners. Parents rate the frequency of each item using a 4-point scale (3 = always, 2 = often, 1= seldom, 0 = never for speaking situations); thus, overall lower scores indicate less speech. Scores are then compared to a “clinical” group of children with selective mutism, as well as “typically developing” children to determine if speech production is within normal limits or if it is significantly discriminate from “typically developing peers.” The SMQ demonstrates high reliability in consistently identifying children who have selective mutism, without detecting children who have other forms of anxiety disorders.
The SMQ can be used in two ways—quantitatively and qualitatively. Quantitatively, the SMQ can be used to provide scores, as noted above, as evidence of a possible selective mutism diagnosis. Alternatively, it also can be used qualitatively in conjunction with Dr. Elisa Shipon-Blum’s Selective Mutism-Stages of Communication Comfort Scale© (SM-SCCS) to describe the severity of the selective mutism and build goals for school. The SM-SCCS is a guide to determining the child’s current stage of communication. See page 113 for the four stages of social communication.
In order to use the SM-SCCS qualitatively, users can look for the general trend in scores within each subsection. For instance, if parents scored mostly 0’s for their child’s speech in social situations, that child could be said to be functioning at Stage 0 in public settings. If most scores were 1’s in the school setting, the child could be said to be functioning generally in Stage 1 in the school setting. Using the SMQ and SM-SCCS in this way not only allows professionals and parents to describe the child’s current speech, but also provides descriptive verbiage for goal setting in special education plans (e.g., “Child will move from Stage 1 to Stage 3 with teacher in a one-on-one setting,” “Child will move from Stage 0 to Stage 1 in the general classroom setting,” etc.). More information on special education evaluation and planning will be provided in Chapter 7.
In addition to the SMQ and SM-SCCS, other anxiety-specific or general mental health questionnaires can be given to the child, parents, and teachers. One of the restrictions on using additional measures for children with selective mutism is age norms; most children diagnosed with selective mutism are quite young (younger than 8 years old), but many overall anxiety questionnaires are normed for children ages 8 and up. Some appropriate questionnaires include:
• The Screen for Childhood Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED). The SCARED
provides both a self-report and parent-report form measuring symptoms of childhood anxiety disorders, including separation anxiety, social anxiety, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive- compulsive disorder, panic disorder, traumatic stress disorder, and specific phobias. It is normed for children ages 8 to18.
• The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory for Children (SPAI-C). The SPAI-C requires a third
grade reading level, and allows the child to self-report on a range of potentially anxiety-provoking social situations. It is normed for children ages 8 to14 (Beidel, 1996).
• The KID-SCID (childhood disorders version of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV) is a structured interview with questions related to mood, anxiety, and disruptive behavior disorders for children ages 7-17 (Matzner, 1997).
• Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children (MASC). The MASC is used to assess major anxiety symptoms including physical symptoms of anxiety, social anxiety, separation anxiety, and panic disorder. It is normed for children ages 8-19 years (Pearson Education).
• Behavioral Assessment System for Children (BASC). The BASC is a behavioral rating scale and self-report personality scale which measures internalizing and externalizing symptoms as well as adaptive skills. It includes a self-report, parent-report, and teacher-report, and is normed for ages 4- 18 (Reynolds, 2004). 

问卷和评分标尺
在完整的诊断访谈之后，问卷和评级量表可以将儿童与选择性缄默症状以及相关焦虑症状领域的“典型发育阶段”进行比较。目前只有一篇专门针对选择性缄默症的已发表的调查问卷 - 选择性突变问卷（Bergman，2008）。选择性突变问卷（SMQ）的开发是为了获得有关儿童在家庭，学校和公众三个主要环境中的交流的信息。 SMQ是一份17项父母报告调查问卷，适用于3-11岁的儿童。要求家长在几个不同的环境和不同的可能的对话伙伴中评价孩子的发言频率。家长使用4分制评分每个项目的频率（3 =总是，2 =经常，1 =很少，0 =从不用于说话情况）;因此，整体较低的分数表示较少的语音。然后将得分与具有选择性缄默症的“临床”儿童组以及“通常正在发育”的儿童进行比较，以确定语音产生是否在正常范围内，或者是否与“通常正在发育的同龄人”明显不同.SMQ表现出高持续识别有选择性缄默症的儿童的可靠性，而不会发现患有其他形式焦虑症的儿童。
SMQ可以以两种方式使用 - 定量和定性。定量地，如上所述，SMQ可用于提供分数作为可能的选择性缄默症诊断的证据。或者，它也可以与Elisa Shipon-Blum博士的选择性突变 - 通信舒适量表©（SM-SCCS）一起定性地用于描述选择性缄默症的严重性并为学校建立目标。 SM-SCCS是确定儿童当前沟通阶段的指南。有关社交沟通的四个阶段，请参见第113页。
为了定性地使用SM-SCCS，用户可以在每个子部分中查找分数的总趋势。例如，如果父母在社交场合的孩子讲话时得分大多为0，则可以说该孩子在公共场所的0阶段正常运作。如果在学校环境中大多数分数是1分，那么可以说孩子在学校环境中的第1阶段中正常运作。以这种方式使用SMQ和SM-SCCS不仅可以让专业人士和家长描述孩子当前的演讲，还可以为特殊教育计划中的目标设定提供描述性的措辞（例如，“孩子将从教师的第1阶段进入第3阶段在一对一的设置中，“”儿童将在一般教室环境中从第0阶段移至第1阶段，“等等。有关特殊教育评估和规划的更多信息将在第7章中提供。
除了SMQ和SM-SCCS之外，还可以向孩子，父母和教师提供其他焦虑或一般的心理健康问卷。对选择性缄默儿童使用额外措施的限制之一是年龄规范;大多数被诊断患有选择性缄默症的儿童都很年轻（小于8岁），但许多整体焦虑问卷都是针对8岁及以上儿童的标准。一些适当的问卷包括：
•儿童焦虑相关情绪障碍筛查（SCARED）。 SCARED
提供自我报告和父母报告形式，测量儿童焦虑症的症状，包括分离焦虑，社交焦虑，广泛性焦虑症，强迫症，恐慌症，创伤性应激障碍和特定恐惧症。它适用于8至18岁的儿童。
•社交恐怖症和儿童焦虑量表（SPAI-C）。 SPAI-C需要第三名
年级阅读水平，并允许孩子自我报告一系列可能引起焦虑的社交情况。它适用于8至14岁的儿童（Beidel，1996）。
•KID-SCID（DSM-IV结构化临床访谈的儿童紊乱版本）是针对7-17岁儿童的情绪，焦虑和破坏性行为障碍相关问题的结构化访谈（Matzner，1997）。
•儿童多维焦虑量表（MASC）。 MASC用于评估主要焦虑症状，包括焦虑，社交焦虑，分离焦虑和恐慌症的身体症状。它适用于8-19岁的儿童（Pearson Education）。
•儿童行为评估系统（BASC）。 BASC是一种行为评定量表和自我报告的人格量表，用于衡量内在化和外化症状以及适应性技能。它包括自我报告，家长报告和教师报告，并为4至18岁的人提供标准（Reynolds，2004）。

DIRECT STRUCTURED OBSERVATION
Prior to designing treatment, many questions need to be answered: what verbal communication needs to be shaped, which people and environments need to be introduced, which reinforcements are most helpful and most likely to be easily employed in the home and classroom, and what accidental reinforcement is being provided from teachers, peers, parents, siblings, and friends. While interviews and questionnaires can garner helpful data, direct observations can provide a wealth of information. In fact, behavioral observations have been described as the “key lynchpin” of assessment and treatment of selective mutism (Kearney, 2006). In order to help plan treatment, the clinician should engage the child in a structured observation. It is beneficial, if possible, to do an observation in three main settings:
1. At home
a. A videotape made by parents of the child when they are comfortable, relaxed, and verbal. 
b. An interaction with the clinician in the home setting (i.e., the clinician visits the child’s home to learn more about the family dynamic and play with the child in the environment where they likely feel the most comfortable). 
2. In the school 
a. The clinician sits quietly and discretely in the classroom, watching the group factors that may influence the child’s speech or lack of speech (see the information on functional behavioral analysis below). 
3. In a novel location (such as a psychologist’s office, a restaurant, or a store)—a sample structured observation sheet is included on page 114. 
a. The clinician observes the child one-on-one with the parent in a novel setting, such as an office playroom. 
b. The clinician observes the outcome of introducing a novel adult or child into the interaction. 
c. The novel person prompts the child with questions, increasing in difficulty level (from yes/no questions to forced choice questions and ending with open-ended questions). 
d. The novel person exits the room, and the clinician observes the child as they return to baseline.
If the child does not already know the clinician, the first observation should be in the classroom. This would allow the clinician to observe the child without awareness that he is the focus of the observation. As a psychologist, I perform the public observation in my office. In my office, there is a playroom with a one-way mirror and a sound system that allows me to watch the interactions between parents and children in a play situation. However, even if there is no access to a one-way mirror, an effective observation could be done with a webcam in the room. Finally, an observation could be made by an examiner sitting in the same room as unobtrusively as possible (with the expectation that their presence may change the behavior of the child; therefore, this is not a preferable way of conducting an observation if any other mode is possible).

直接结构化观察
在设计治疗之前，需要回答许多问题：需要形成什么样的口头交流，需要引入哪些人和环境，哪些增援最有帮助，最容易在家庭和教室中使用，以及什么是偶然的教师，同龄人，父母，兄弟姐妹和朋友正在加强。虽然访谈和问卷调查可以获得有用的数据，但直接观察可以提供丰富的信息。事实上，行为观察被描述为评估和治疗选择性缄默症的“关键关键”（Kearney，2006）。为了帮助计划治疗，临床医生应该让孩子参与结构化观察。如果可能的话，在三个主要环境中进行观察是有益的：
1.在家里
一个。由孩子的父母在舒适，放松和口头表达时制作的录像带。
湾在家庭环境中与临床医生的交互（即，临床医生访问孩子的家以更多地了解家庭动态并在他们可能感觉最舒适的环境中与孩子一起玩耍）。
在学校里
一个。临床医生静静地，独立地坐在教室里，观察可能影响孩子讲话或缺乏言语的群体因素（参见下面关于功能行为分析的信息）。
3.在一个新的位置（如心理学家的办公室，餐馆或商店） - 第114页包含样本结构化观察表。
一个。临床医生在新颖的环境中与父母一对一地观察孩子，例如办公室游戏室。
湾临床医生观察将新的成人或儿童引入相互作用的结果。
C。这个小说的人提示孩子有问题，难度水平增加（从是/否问题到强迫选择问题，以开放式问题结束）。
d。这个新人退出房间，临床医生在孩子回到基线时观察孩子。
如果孩子还不知道临床医生，第一次观察应该在教室里。这将允许临床医生观察孩子而不会意识到他是观察的焦点。作为心理学家，我在办公室进行公众观察。在我的办公室里，有一个带单向镜子和音响系统的游戏室，让我可以在游戏情况下观看父母和孩子之间的互动。但是，即使无法访问单向镜像，也可以使用房间内的网络摄像头进行有效观察。最后，可以由坐在同一房间内的审查员尽可能不引人注意地进行观察（期望他们的存在可能会改变孩子的行为;因此，如果有任何其他模式，这不是进行观察的优选方式是可能的）。

STRUCTURED SCHOOL OBSERVATION
The process of conducting a structured school observation can provide an enormous amount of data and information to the assessment of selective mutism (Schill, 1996). In order to provide information for treatment planning, an observation would take into consideration the same questions asked in the diagnostic intake: who does the child talk to, where does the child talk, and how does he or she communicate? The clinician can code communicative behaviors (e.g., gestures, whispering, mouthing, sounds, one-word responses, multiple-word responses, longer utterances, or initiating). Additionally, it is helpful to note to whom the child directs communication (e.g., known adult vs. novel adult, known peer vs. novel peer). The clinician should track where the child communicates (e.g., one-on-one, in a small group, in front of a larger group). Finally, it is important to record key antecedents (e.g., demands/expectations of the situation or lack thereof), outcomes or consequences of the mutism, and possible reinforcers used to produce speech. Generally, the function of the mutism is predicted to be avoidance-based. A sample school observation sheet is included on page 116.
Information garnered through the direct structured observation and classroom observation can be used to determine what intervention technique is recommended. In Chapter 4, these data will be considered in determining whether to use shaping or fading techniques in treatment.
It is important to note that the child with selective mutism may surprise you by speaking to you in the evaluation, particularly if the evaluation occurs in a one-on-one private setting. Kurtz (2011) reported that when evaluating students with SM following a brief rapport-building interaction, 27% of the children responded to the examiner’s first question, 36% responded to the second question, and 43% responded to the third question asked by the examiner. This should not necessarily rule out selective mutism, but should be noted for consideration when determining the best intervention.

固有模式学校的观察
进行结构化学校观察的过程可以为选择性缄默症的评估提供大量的数据和信息（Schill，1996）。为了提供治疗计划的信息，观察会考虑诊断摄入中提出的相同问题：孩子与谁交谈，孩子在哪里说话，以及他或她如何交流？临床医生可以编码交流行为（例如，手势，耳语，口腔，声音，单词响应，多词响应，更长的话语或发起）。另外，注意孩子指导沟通的人是有帮助的（例如，已知成人与新成人，已知同伴与新同伴）。临床医生应该跟踪孩子在哪里进行通信（例如，一对一，在一个小组中，在一个较大的组前面）。最后，重要的是记录关键的前因（例如，对情况的要求/期望或缺乏），缄默的结果或后果，以及用于产生言语的可能的强化物。通常，预测缄默症的功能是基于回避的。第116页包含示例学校观察表。
通过直接结构化观察和课堂观察获得的信息可用于确定推荐的干预技术。在第4章中，将在确定是否在治疗中使用整形或褪色技术时考虑这些数据。
值得注意的是，选择性缄默症的孩子可能会在评估中与您说话，这可能会让您感到惊讶，特别是如果评估是在一对一的私人环境中进行的。 Kurtz（2011）报告说，在通过简短的关系建立互动对SM学生进行评估时，27％的孩子回答了考官的第一个问题，36％回答了第二个问题，43％回答了第三个问题。考官。这不一定排除选择性缄默症，但在确定最佳干预时应注意考虑。

RULING OUT CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS
As discussed in the previous chapters, there are many different disorders that can occur in conjunction with selective mutism, including other anxiety disorders and speech/language weaknesses or disorders. There are also many diagnoses that may share symptoms with selective mutism, such as autism spectrum disorders. The main differential symptom between selective mutism and other anxiety disorders, developmental disorders, or language-based disorders is that the child with selective mutism can talk in certain situations, but is not able to use that same quality/consistency/volume of speech in other situations due to anxiety. Thus, a child could have an autism spectrum disorder and selective mutism, if they are able to speak in one situation (despite the quality or social appropriateness of that speech) and not in a more public environment. The characteristic differentiating autism from selective mutism is the clear gap between the child’s behaviors in a “safe” or comfortable environment, such as in the home setting, and behavior in social or performance settings, such as the school environment. In order to evaluate for these other disorders, a full psycho-educational evaluation could also include (but is not limited to):
• speech/language evaluation
• evaluation of intellectual functioning (a multi-dimensional nonverbal intelligence scale, such as the
Leiter-R may be most appropriate)
• educational evaluation
• hearing evaluation
• oral-motor examination of coordination and strength in the muscles of the jaw, tongue and lips
• evaluation for autism symptoms (such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule). Please note
that many of the scoring criteria of the ADOS rely on communication with the examiner, and the child with selective mutism may not be able to communicate consistently either verbally or nonverbally. Thus, the ADOS should only be used as one piece of data in an evaluation for autism.

排除并发性疾病
正如前面章节中所讨论的，有许多不同的疾病可以与选择性缄默症一起发生，包括其他焦虑症和言语/语言弱点或障碍。还有许多诊断可能与选择性缄默症共享症状，例如自闭症谱系障碍。选择性缄默症与其他焦虑症，发育障碍或基于语言的障碍之间的主要差别症状是，选择性缄默症的孩子在某些情况下可以说话，但在其他情况下不能使用相同的质量/一致性/音量。焦虑的情况。因此，如果孩子能够在一种情况下说话（尽管该语言的质量或社会适宜性）而不是在更公共的环境中，则儿童可能患有自闭症谱系障碍和选择性缄默症。自闭症与选择性缄默症的区别在于儿童在“安全”或舒适环境中的行为（例如在家庭环境中）与社交或表演环境中的行为（例如学校环境）之间的明显差距。为了评估这些其他疾病，完整的心理教育评估还可以包括（但不限于）：
•言语/语言评估
•评估智力功能（多维非语言智力量表，如Leiter-R可能是最合适的）
•教育评估
•听力评估
•口腔 - 运动检查下颌，舌头和嘴唇肌肉的协调性和力量
•评估自闭症症状（如自闭症诊断观察时间表）。请注意
ADOS的许多评分标准依赖于与检查者的沟通，而选择性缄默症的孩子可能无法通过口头或非口头方式进行一致的沟通。因此，ADOS应仅用作自闭症评估中的一个数据。
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Who can make a diagnosis? For an official diagnosis, the determination must be made by a clinical psychologist, licensed clinical mental health counselor, clinical social worker, psychiatric nurse, speech/language pathologist, or physician (such as a pediatrician or psychiatrist). However, many other individuals are also very important in both the evaluation and treatment team. One of the most important and helpful professionals is the speech/language pathologist.
Speech/language pathologists (SLP) can receive a lot of contradictory messages on their role in the evaluation and treatment of selective mutism. At times, they are encouraged to be involved, but in other situations they may be told that selective mutism is an anxiety disorder and should therefore be addressed by professionals who have expertise in anxiety. They themselves may be uncomfortable with the idea of being involved in the treatment of an anxiety disorder. Is selective mutism an anxiety disorder? Yes. Is selective mutism a pragmatic communication disorder? Yes. Social interactions are the basis for language learning, and children with reduced social interactions may have fewer opportunities for language learning, feedback, and practice. Therefore, having an SLP on the evaluation and treatment team can be extremely helpful.
The role of the SLP in the evaluation team is obvious—ruling out fundamental communication disorders and describing symptoms, situations, and weaknesses that may impact the child’s ability to use speech consistently and correctly. As noted before, if the child has an underlying communication problem, he or she is at a higher risk for selective mutism and can have a longer treatment timeline. The American Speech Language Hearing Association lists multiple roles and responsibilities for the SLP, including assessing and treating the social aspects of communication, or social pragmatics. These can and should be included in the evaluation of a child with selective mutism, and should be considered when making a diagnosis.
A speech and language assessment of a child with selective mutism might include:
• Speech production
• Fluency (the rhythm of speech)
• Receptive language (what the child understands)
• Expressive language (what the child can convey verbally, including word-finding, sentence
formulation, narrative quality, etc.)
• Pragmatic language (knowledge of the social rules of speech)
• Articulation (how speech sounds are made)
With this information, an SLP can determine if the child’s speech and language skills limit him/her socially, if they are using language appropriately, and if there are sufficient opportunities to communicate. Possible treatment targets may include motor planning and articulation, syntax and morphology, increasing sentence length and complexity, addressing word-finding weaknesses, sentence formation, and teaching/rehearsing pragmatics of speech.
Children with selective mutism can be quite a challenge to evaluate in a reliable, valid manner. Their difficulty responding both verbally and nonverbally, slowness to response or inefficiency working quickly, and avoidance of interacting with novel adults can easily lead to much lower scores on tests and, without consideration of the impact of anxiety, a misinterpretation of the child’s ability level. Additionally, anxiety can mask a child’s language abilities (Klein, 2012). We as practitioners must be very careful in the interpretation of our test results, as it is unfair to a child if we take the scores we receive as their overall level of potential.
Recently at a presentation for SLPs, I was discussing the tendency for scores to be an under- estimate of the child’s ability, both cognitively and academically, when one of the participants raised her hand to share an experience. She had been working with a child diagnosed with selective mutism who had been referred to the school psychologist for a cognitive evaluation. When the evaluation team met to review the testing results, the psychologist provided his diagnosis of cognitive impairment, based on extremely low scores in intelligence testing. This was not the child the SLP knew—the child appeared quite intelligent, and his teachers reported that he always did well on written work. When asked to provide more information on the testing, the psychologist admitted that the child “chose not to respond” and therefore received a zero score on most items, resulting in an IQ score in the severely impaired range. This circumstance resulted in an invalid interpretation of scores. Thus, it is important to be cognizant of the effect of selective mutism on all testing, and to be sensitive to the resulting outcomes.
Professionals (both speech/language pathologists and psychologists) can increase the validity of evaluation outcomes for children with selective mutism by using a few “alternative” assessment strategies:
• First, the assessor should attempt to develop a relationship with the child, as opposed to jumping directly into testing. Prior to the evaluation, the evaluator may consider having 2-3 sessions with the child in a fun, play-based interaction without the expectation for speech.
• The evaluation should be completed either one-on-one with the evaluator or with only the child, parent, and evaluator in the room. Some children are able to speak to or read to their parent with another individual in the room listening.
• The assessor should take care not to engage the child in unnecessary eye-contact, as sustained eye- contact from unfamiliar people can make children with selective mutism uncomfortable (Shipon- Blum, 2003). That does not mean no eye-contact, but that the examiner should “busy herself” when possible with other activities and limit direct eye gaze.
• Parents may be used as test presenters. In fact, research has shown that parents trained in test presentations can be effective evaluators and can produce significantly higher language test scores in comparison to professionals (Klein, 2012).
• Evaluators may have to use more non-specific and qualitative evaluations of speech through videotapes or audiotapes of the children in comfortable situations.
When the evaluator has data suggesting a pattern of speaking comfortably in at least one environment versus a lack of speech in more public environments, and other reasons for this difficulty in speaking have been ruled out through a diagnostic interview, clinical observation, psycho-educational evaluation (including speech, hearing, and differential diagnosis consideration), we can feel confident in diagnosing selective mutism. And luckily, this evaluation plan provides a wealth of great information to prepare for the next step—treatment.

做出诊断
谁可以做出诊断？对于官方诊断，必须由临床心理学家，持牌临床心理健康顾问，临床社会工作者，精神科护士，言语/语言病理学家或医生（如儿科医生或精神科医生）进行确定。然而，许多其他人在评估和治疗团队中也非常重要。语言/语言病理学家是最重要和最有帮助的专业人士之一。
言语/语言病理学家（SLP）可以收到很多关于他们在选择性缄默症的评估和治疗中的作用的矛盾信息。有时鼓励他们参与其中，但在其他情况下，他们可能会被告知选择性缄默症是一种焦虑症，因此应该由具有焦虑专业知识的专业人士来解决。他们自己可能对参与治疗焦虑症的想法感到不安。选择性缄默症是一种焦虑症吗？是。选择性缄默症是一种务实的沟通障碍吗？是。社交互动是语言学习的基础，社交互动减少的儿童可能缺乏语言学习，反馈和实践的机会。因此，在评估和治疗团队中获得SLP可能非常有帮助。
SLP在评估团队中的作用是显而易见的 - 排除基本的沟通障碍，并描述可能影响孩子一致和正确使用语言能力的症状，情况和弱点。如前所述，如果孩子存在潜在的沟通问题，他或她处于选择性缄默症的风险较高，并且可以有更长的治疗时间表。美国语言听力协会列出了SLP的多重角色和职责，包括评估和处理沟通的社会方面或社会语用学。这些可以而且应该包含在对有选择性缄默症的儿童的评估中，并且在做出诊断时应该考虑。
对有选择性缄默的儿童进行语言和语言评估可能包括：
•演讲制作
•流利（语音节奏）
•接受语言（孩子理解的内容）
•表达语言（孩子可以口头传达的内容，包括找词，句子
制定，叙事质量等）
•实用语言（社会言语规则的知识）
•清晰度（如何发出语音）
有了这些信息，SLP可以确定孩子的言语和语言技能是否会限制他/她的社交，是否正确使用语言，以及是否有足够的机会进行交流。可能的治疗目标可能包括运动计划和清晰度，语法和形态，增加句子长度和复杂性，解决词语发现缺陷，句子形成，以及教授/排练语言语用学。
选择性缄默症的儿童以可靠，有效的方式进行评估可能是一项挑战。他们在口头和非口语上的反应困难，反应缓慢或效率低下，以及避免与新成人互动，很容易导致测试得分低得多，并且在不考虑焦虑的影响的情况下，误解了孩子的能力水平。此外，焦虑可以掩盖孩子的语言能力（Klein，2012）。我们作为从业者在解释我们的测试结果时必须非常小心，因为如果我们将我们收到的分数作为他们的整体潜力水平，这对孩子是不公平的。
最近在一篇关于SLP的演讲中，我正在讨论当一位参与者举手分享经验时，分数是否会在认知和学术上低估孩子的能力。她一直在与一名被诊断患有选择性缄默症的孩子一起工作，并被提交给学校心理学家进行认知评估。当评估小组开会审查测试结果时，心理学家根据智力测试中的极低分数提供了他的认知障碍诊断。这不是SLP知道的孩子 - 这个孩子看起来非常聪明，他的老师报告说他总是在写作上做得很好。当被要求提供有关测试的更多信息时，心理学家承认孩子“选择不回应”，因此在大多数项目上获得零分，导致智力分数在严重受损范围内。这种情况导致对分数的无效解释。因此，重要的是要认识到选择性缄默对所有测试的影响，并对所得到的结果敏感。
专业人士（语言/语言病理学家和心理学家）可以通过使用一些“替代”评估策略来提高选择性缄默症儿童评估结果的有效性：
•首先，评估员应该尝试与孩子建立关系，而不是跳跃直接进入测试。在评估之前，评估者可以考虑在有趣的，基于游戏的交互中与孩子进行2-3次会话而不期望发言。
•评估应与评估员一对一完成，或者只与房间中的孩子，家长和评估员一起完成。有些孩子可以和房间里的另一个人一起听父母讲话或读书。
•评估员应注意不要让孩子接触不必要的眼神，因为不熟悉的人的持续眼神接触会使选择性缄默症的孩子感到不舒服（Shipon-Blum，2003）。这并不意味着没有目光接触，但审查员应该尽可能“忙碌”其他活动，并限制直接注视。
•父母可以用作测试演示者。事实上，研究表明，接受过测试演示培训的家长可以成为有效的评估者，与专业人士相比可以产生更高的语言测试成绩（Klein，2012）。
•评估者可能必须通过孩子们在舒适的情况下的录像带或录音带对其语言进行更多非特定和定性的评估。
当评估者的数据表明至少在一个环境中说话的模式与在更多公共环境中缺乏言语时相比，并且通过诊断访谈，临床观察，心理教育评估排除了说话困难的其他原因。 （包括言语，听力和鉴别诊断考虑），我们可以对诊断选择性缄默症有信心。幸运的是，这个评估计划提供了大量的信息，为下一步治疗做好准备。

CHAPTER 4
RE-WRITING THE AVOIDANCE SCRIPT
Following the evaluation and diagnosis of selective mutism, we begin the fun (but admittedly challenging) step—the intervention. The main sections of intervention discussed in this chapter include:
1. Determining the intervention “team” and main interventionists 2. Building rapport between the child and interventionists 3. Educating the child about his/her anxiety 4. Developing the behavioral treatment plan, including a communication ladder (shaping) and stimulus fading plan。
This chapter is arguably the most practical, as it provides the “meat” of the intervention. Please consider making notes in the margins and filling in the workbook sections as you proceed.

第四章
重写逃避免脚本
在选择性缄默症的评估和诊断之后，我们开始了有趣（但无可否认具有挑战性）的步骤 - 干预。 本章讨论的主要干预部分包括：
1.确定干预“团队”和主要干预者
2.在儿童和干预者之间建立融洽关系
3.教育孩子关于他/她的焦虑
4.制定行为治疗计划，包括沟通阶梯（塑形）和刺激衰退计划。
本章可以说是最实用的，因为它提供了干预的“肉”。 在您继续操作时，请考虑在边距中做笔记并填写工作簿部分。

DETERMINING THE INTERVENTION “TEAM” AND MAIN INTERVENTIONISTS
In Chapter 2, the conceptualization of selective mutism identified avoidance as a coping strategy. The child becomes overwhelmed with anxiety and tries to avoid the interaction or occurrence which is causing the anxiety. An important piece of the intervention involves what often happens next— individuals accidentally step in and rescue the child. This behavior is born of the desire to comfort the child and reduce the anxiety, but can backfire when adults, peers, parents, teachers, and siblings help the child maintain the avoidance behavior. There are many ways that “rescuing” occurs:
• Parents respond for the child (e.g., order for the child at restaurants, answer for the child, tell extended family members what the child wants, etc.)
• Teachers stop asking the child questions in class
• Peers stop interacting verbally with the child in class
• Peers or siblings quickly state, “Jamie does not talk.” or answer for the child when others ask a question
• Others provide the child with easy nonverbal communication tools (e.g., only ask yes/no questions to allow head shaking/nodding, accept and encourage written responses, etc.)
To begin building the intervention team, it is important to begin thinking about those individuals in the child’s life who accidentally rescue and reinforce the avoidance. Who may be “accidental reinforcers” in the child’s life, and what do they do to help maintain the avoidance of speech?

确定干预“团队”和主要干预措施
在第2章中，选择性缄默症的概念化将避免视为应对策略。孩子变得焦虑不安，并试图避免引起焦虑的相互作用或发生。干预的一个重要部分涉及接下来经常发生的事情 - 个人意外地介入并拯救孩子。这种行为源于安慰孩子和减少焦虑的愿望，但当成年人，同龄人，父母，老师和兄弟姐妹帮助孩子维持避免行为时，可能会适得其反。有许多方法可以“拯救”：
•父母为孩子做出回应（例如，在餐馆为孩子订购，为孩子回答，告诉大家庭成员孩子想要什么，等等）
•教师不再在课堂上询问孩子的问题
•同伴停止在课堂上与孩子口头互动
•同伴或兄弟姐妹很快说出“杰米不会说话。”或在别人提问时为孩子回答
•其他人为孩子提供简单的非语言交流工具（例如，只询问是/否问题以允许头部摇晃/点头，接受并鼓励书面回复等）
要开始建立干预团队，重要的是要开始考虑孩子生命中那些意外拯救和加强避免的人。谁可能是孩子生命中的“意外强化者”，他们如何帮助维持言语的避免？

Person How do they inadvertently reinforce avoidance?
人们如何无意中加强了逃避行为？
These accidental reinforcers are those individuals that we particularly need on the treatment “team”—we need them to become knowledgeable about selective mutism and learn ways to stop reinforcing the avoidance. A “team” in the general sense of the word (which broadly encapsulates those who know the child’s strengths/weaknesses and are armed with some strategies to assist in building “brave” skills) may include:
• Parents
• Teachers
• School administrators
• Speech/language pathologists
• Social workers
• School psychologists
• School counselors
• Behavioral analyst/behavioral specialist
• Clinical psychologists
• Classroom peers/friends
• Siblings
• Extended family, particularly common caregivers
However, a core treatment team (those responsible for carrying out the actual intervention) includes the parents, the keyworker within the school setting, and the mental health professional outside of the school setting (e.g., behavioral analyst, clinical psychologist). All members have different responsibilities:
A keyworker is the individual inside the school setting who is responsible for:
1. Managing and implementing the behavioral intervention inside the school setting 
2. Generalizing speech to all school environments and with as many people as possible 
3. Communicating with the teacher, parents, and treating psychologist
Most frequently, a keyworker is a person with either a mental health or speech/language background and training, such as a school psychologist, behavioral analyst, social worker, counselor, or speech/language pathologist. However, determining a keyworker who can regularly meet with the child is difficult—professionals are overworked, caseloads are at capacity, and schools may have a limited number of special education personnel. Therefore, the functional or realistic criteria for a keyworker are someone who can consistently work with the child, is caring and interested in the intervention, is willing to be flexible and learn more about selective mutism, and is a good personality match for the child. I have been on treatment teams where the keyworker was a principal, school nurse, teaching assistant, paraprofessional, and reading specialist, among others. The teacher is not recommended as a keyworker. This is not because of training, ability level, or desire, but simply because teachers usually have 30+ children regularly in their care and finding time to focus one-on-one regularly with a specific child may put too much stress on an already stressful job. It is usually preferable that another individual take the position of the keyworker but communicate very closely with the teacher.
Another important characteristic of a keyworker is availability for consistent intervention. Today’s schools encourage group pull-outs for special education services. This likely will not work for the child with selective mutism—at least not at first. Although there are some notable exceptions (such as children who speak more easily when they are in the room with a friend or sibling), in order for most children to be successful, they need to first meet with the keyworker in one-on-one interactions on a frequent basis. In order to make consistent and significant progress, meeting individually with the child for 15 minutes three times per week is the minimum necessary. There is a good reason for this, these children are practicing using avoidance strategies every single day, many times per day. In order to change their behavioral repertoire, we need to practice brave behaviors many times per day. The more frequent the practices, the better. If practices occur fewer than three times per week, it is very hard to get traction and make progress. Meeting once per week or once every other week, as is the norm for most special education services in the school, is simply not frequent enough to encourage change.
Some schools have dealt with this issue by naming two keyworkers. For instance, the social worker may meet with the child twice per week and the SLP may meet with him twice per week. It is great to have multiple communication partners within the school, and generally this works well if both keyworkers regularly communicate with one another. It should be expected that the child may progress slightly more slowly at first, as they must become desensitized to two different people instead of one.
The mental health professional outside of the school is responsible for:
1. Developing and maintaining the treatment plan through consultation with the school. 
2. Training parents on strategies to increase communication with extended family/friends and in public settings. 
3. Carrying out “brave practices” in public settings, such as ordering at restaurants, calling people on the phone, asking where to find items in the store, and approaching peers on the playground.
When seeking out a psychologist, behavior analyst or mental health professional to assist in the treatment, it is important to search for some key characteristics:
• Experience working with children, particularly children with anxiety disorders.
• Training and experience in behavioral therapy or cognitive behavioral therapy, and use of these as the main treatment modality.
• A willingness to learn about selective mutism (as it is treated slightly differently from other childhood anxiety disorders).
• A good rapport with the parent, child, and school, and a willingness to work productively with all three.
If you have a mental health professional with expertise or extensive experience in treating selective mutism in your area. . . you are lucky. These individuals can be found on the Selective Mutism Group website at www.selectivemutism.org (search under “Find Help”). Most areas do not have experts in their backyard, and therefore parents must find someone with the qualifications above through good, old- fashioned detective work (otherwise known as calling the psychologist’s office and asking the right questions). If it is at all financially possible, parents are encouraged to make the decision regarding a treating professional on expertise, ability, and fit—not whether they accept the child’s health insurance. While it is understandable that financial considerations are important and necessary for families, effective early intervention is so imperative that wasting time in an ineffective treatment might not be worth the money saved.

这些意外强化者是我们在治疗“团队”中特别需要的那些人 - 我们需要他们对选择性缄默症有所了解并学习如何停止强化避免。一般意义上的“团队”（广泛地包含那些了解孩子的优点/缺点并且拥有一些策略来帮助建立“勇敢”技能的人）可能包括：
•父母
• 教师
•学校管理员
•言语/语言病理学家
• 社会工作者
•学校心理学家
•学校辅导员
•行为分析师/行为专家
•临床心理学家
•课堂同伴/朋友
• 兄弟姐妹
•大家庭，特别是普通护理人员
然而，核心治疗团队（负责实施实际干预的团队）包括父母，学校环境中的关键工作者以及学校以外的心理健康专业人员（例如，行为分析师，临床心理学家）。所有成员都有不同的责任：
关键工作者是学校内部的个人，负责：
1.管理和实施学校环境中的行为干预
2.向所有学校环境和尽可能多的人推广演讲
3.与老师，家长和治疗心理学家沟通
最常见的是，关键工作者是具有心理健康或语言/语言背景和培训的人，例如学校心理学家，行为分析师，社会工作者，辅导员或语言/语言病理学家。但是，确定一个能够定期与孩子见面的关键工作者很困难 - 专业人员工作量过大，案件量很大，学校可能只有有限数量的特殊教育人员。因此，关键工作者的功能或现实标准是能够始终与孩子一起工作，关心和干预的人，愿意灵活并且更多地了解选择性缄默症，并且是孩子的良好个性匹配。我一直在治疗团队，其中主要工作人员是校长，学校护士，助教，辅助专业人员和阅读专家等。不建议老师作为关键工作者。这不是因为培训，能力水平或欲望，而仅仅是因为教师通常有30多个孩子经常接受护理，并且有时间定期与特定孩子一对一关注，可能会对已经有压力的孩子施加过多的压力工作。通常最好是另一个人取得关键工作者的职位，但与老师密切沟通。
关键工作者的另一个重要特征是可持续干预的可用性。今天的学校鼓励团体退出特殊教育服务。这可能对选择性缄默症的孩子不起作用 - 至少在开始时是这样。虽然有一些值得注意的例外（例如孩子在与朋友或兄弟姐妹在一起时更容易说话），为了让大多数孩子获得成功，他们需要先与一对一的主要工作人员见面经常互动。为了取得持续和重大的进展，每周三次与孩子单独会面15分钟是最低限度的必要条件。这有一个很好的理由，这些孩子每天都在练习避免策略，每天多次。为了改变他们的行为曲目，我们需要每天多次练习勇敢的行为。实践越频繁越好。如果每周练习次数少于三次，则很难获得牵引力并取得进展。每周一次或每隔一周开会一次，这是学校大多数特殊教育服务的标准，根本不足以鼓励变革。
一些学校通过命名两名关键工作者来处理这个问题。例如，社会工作者可能每周与孩子会面两次，并且SLP可能每周与他会面两次。在学校内建立多个沟通合作伙伴是很棒的，如果两个核心工作者经常互相沟通，这通常很有效。应该预期孩子一开始可能会稍微慢一点，因为他们必须对两个不同的人而不是一个人脱敏。
学校以外的心理健康专业人员负责：
1.通过与学校协商制定和维护治疗计划。
2.培训家长采取策略，加强与大家庭/朋友和公共场所的沟通。
3.在公共场合进行“勇敢的练习”，例如在餐厅点餐，打电话给人，询问在商店里找物品的地方，以及在操场上接近同龄人。
在寻找心理学家，行为分析师或心理健康专业人士协助治疗时，寻找一些关键特征非常重要：
•与儿童，特别是患有焦虑症的儿童一起工作的经验。
•在行为治疗或认知行为治疗方面的培训和经验，以及将这些作为主要治疗方式的用途。
•愿意学习选择性缄默症（因为它与其他儿童焦虑症略有不同）。
•与家长，孩子和学校保持良好的关系，并愿意与这三者充分合作。
如果您的精神卫生专业人员在您所在地区治疗选择性缄默症方面具有专业知识或丰富经验。 。 。你很幸运。这些人可以在Selective Mutism Group网站www.selectivemutism.org上找到（在“查找帮助”下搜索）。大多数地区的后院都没有专家，因此父母必须通过良好的，老式的侦探工作找到具有上述资格的人（也称为打电话给心理学家的办公室并提出正确的问题）。如果在经济上可行的话，鼓励父母就专业知识，能力和健康状况做出关于治疗专业人员的决定 - 而不是他们是否接受孩子的健康保险。虽然可以理解的是，财务方面的考虑对于家庭来说是重要和必要的，但有效的早期干预是必不可少的，在无效的治疗中浪费时间可能不值得省钱。

Parental responsibilities include:
1. Advocating for the child in the school setting. 
2. Maintaining documentation of everything (school meetings, recommendations by the psychologist, teacher notes, progress notes, etc.). 
3. Communicating with the teacher, keyworker, and clinical psychologist about progress. 
4. Practicing regularly in public and with extended family and friends; this often means creating opportunities for the child to speak (this will be discussed later in Chapter Five).
父母责任包括：
1.在学校环境中倡导孩子。
2.维护所有内容的文件（学校会议，心理学家的建议，教师笔记，进度记录等）。
3.与老师，关键工作者和临床心理学家沟通进展情况。
4.定期在公共场合和大家庭和朋友一起练习; 这通常意味着为孩子创造机会（这将在后面的第五章中讨论）。

BUILD RAPPORT
Once a treatment team is in place and the keyworker(s) have been determined, adults on the treatment team are encouraged to focus on building a positive rapport with the child. In general treatment outcome studies, the best predictor of treatment effectiveness is the relationship between patient and therapist.
Selective mutism is no exception. This section on building rapport is mainly targeted to the treating professional or school personnel (e.g., teacher, keyworker, etc.), and the strategies outlined below are highly recommended for the first few sessions between the adult and a child with selective mutism. However, parents can also support the child’s social and emotional growth by spending concentrated one-on-one time with the child with positive feedback for engaging in verbal interactions. Concentrated one-on-one time, or “special time” as I call it, is based on skills taught in parent child interaction therapy (PCIT), a therapeutic intervention developed to enhance the adult-child relationship by changing the interaction between the two parties. Although it is commonly used for young children with conduct disorder issues, it can also be very beneficial with children with selective mutism to provide positive and rewarding interactions with parents, allow for structured warm-up time with new individuals, and build rapport with novel adults (McNeil, 2010).
The “Do’s” for rapport building or “special time” include:
• Play in a one-on-one setting. It is almost impossible to completely focus on a child and make them
feel comfortable if there are other children, siblings, and adults entering and exiting the interaction.
• Play at the child’s level and follow their lead. Activities that lend themselves well to this time include open-ended, creative play such as arts and crafts, constructional toys such as Legos, building blocks, and magnetic blocks, dollhouses with miniature people, and marble run sets. With older children, developmentally-appropriate (i.e., more complex) arts and crafts projects, board games, apps, etc. can be used to interact.
• Turn off all cell phones and distractions.
• PRIDE skills—rapport-building techniques that enhance the relationship.
PRIDE Skills


*Adapted from McNeil, 2010.

建立关系
一旦治疗团队到位并且确定了关键工作者，就鼓励治疗团队的成年人专注于与孩子建立积极的关系。在一般治疗结果研究中，治疗有效性的最佳预测因素是患者与治疗师之间的关系。
选择性缄默也不例外。关于建立关系的这一部分主要针对治疗专业人员或学校人员（例如，教师，关键工作者等），并且强烈建议在成人和选择性缄默儿童之间的前几个阶段中概述下面概述的策略。然而，父母也可以通过与孩子一对一地集中进行口头互动来积极反馈，从而支持孩子的社交和情感发展。我称之为一对一时间或“特殊时间”，是基于父母儿童互动疗法（PCIT）所教授的技能，这是一种治疗干预措施，旨在通过改变两者之间的相互作用来增强成人与儿童的关系。派对。虽然它通常用于有行为障碍问题的幼儿，但对于有选择性缄默症的儿童来说，与父母提供积极和有益的互动，允许与新个体进行有组织的预热时间，并与新成人建立融洽关系，这也是非常有益的。 （麦克尼尔，2010年）。
建立关系或“特殊时间”的“做”包括：
•以一对一的方式进行游戏。几乎不可能完全专注于孩子并制造它们
如果有其他孩子，兄弟姐妹和成年人进入和退出互动，我会感到很舒服。
•在孩子的水平上玩并跟随他们的领先。此时非常适合的活动包括开放式的创意游戏，如艺术和手工艺品，建筑玩具，如乐高积木，积木，磁性积木，带微型人的玩具屋和大理石跑步套装。对于年龄较大的儿童，可以使用适合发展的（即更复杂的）艺术和手工艺项目，棋盘游戏，应用程序等进行交互。
•关闭所有手机和分心。
•PRIDE技能 - 建立融洽关系的技巧。
PRIDE技能





Many individuals are confused by the difference between reflections and behavioral descriptions. Reflections are a restatement of anything the child communicates, either verbally or nonverbally. For example, if the child made a verbal comment, a reflection would simply restate that comment (taking care not to turn the reflection into a question by adding an inflection to your voice). If the child nodded or pointed, a reflection would acknowledge that nonverbal communication. A behavioral description is much like the job of a sports announcer—it is providing the commentary of what is occurring in the play interaction.
“Special time” can be used to build rapport with a novel (or less familiar) adult. My first session(s) almost always include PRIDE skills, as the children are usually nervous and apprehensive when first meeting me, and my first goal in treatment is to build rapport. If there is one thing we know about children, it is that if they like you and respect you (and feel respected by you), they will try so very hard to accomplish the goals you set. If they don’t like you or don’t feel a rapport with you, they will likely do. . . nothing. PRIDE skills can be used by teachers when they first meet a new student, keyworkers when they begin working with the student in the school setting, clinical psychologists at the first session or few sessions to build rapport, parents to enhance the relationship and calm their child when the situation is overwhelming. The list of possible opportunities for use goes on and on.
The goal of “special time” with keyworkers or novel adults is to build rapport, but parents can also utilize “special time” to develop and practice interpersonal and social skills. This “special time” with parents can be particularly beneficial if paired with role-playing of typical, real-life communicative situations. Since speaking can be a high-stress and multi-faceted skill, scripting (e.g., developing an over-practiced language routine) can reduce anxiety and increase the likelihood that speech will just “slip out.” For example, most children regularly go out to a restaurant to order, the café to buy a donut, or the store to purchase an item. For young children, role-playing of these activities can be done within pretend play situations. Some examples of role-playing could include:
许多人对反思和行为描述之间的差异感到困惑。反思是对孩子所传达的任何事物的重述，无论是口头还是非口头。例如，如果孩子发表了口头评论，那么反思就会重新发表评论（注意不要通过在你的声音中添加一个变形来将反思变成一个问题）。如果孩子点头或指出，反思会承认非语言交流。行为描述很像体育播音员的工作 - 它提供了对游戏互动中发生的事情的评论。
“特殊时间”可用于与新颖（或不太熟悉）的成年人建立融洽关系。我的第一次会议几乎总是包括PRIDE技能，因为孩子们在第一次见到我时通常会感到紧张和忧虑，而我的第一个治疗目标是建立融洽关系。如果我们对孩子有一点了解，那就是如果他们喜欢你并尊重你（并且感到受到你的尊重），他们会非常努力地完成你设定的目标。如果他们不喜欢你或者与你没有关系，他们很可能会这样做。 。 。没有。教师在初次见到新学生时可以使用PRIDE技能，当他们开始在学校环境中与学生一起工作时，可以使用PRIDE技能，在第一次会议上使用临床心理学家或在几次会议中建立融洽关系，父母可以加强关系并让孩子平静下来当情况势不可挡时。可能的使用机会清单一直在继续。
与关键工作者或小说成年人“特殊时间”的目标是建立融洽关系，但父母也可以利用“特殊时间”来发展和实践人际关系和社交技能。如果与典型的，真实的交际情境的角色扮演相结合，与父母的这个“特殊时间”可能特别有益。由于说话可能是一种高压力和多方面的技能，脚本（例如，开发过度练习的语言例程）可以减少焦虑并增加言语“滑出”的可能性。例如，大多数孩子经常外出到餐馆订购，咖啡馆买甜甜圈，或商店购买物品。对于幼儿来说，这些活动的角色扮演可以在假装游戏情境中完成。角色扮演的一些例子可能包括：
• Parent plays the role of storekeeper and the child “purchases” items in the store. A script
could include the child bringing the items to the counter and asking, “How much do I owe you?” After the parent responds with a price, the child hands over the money, which is good practice of handover-takeover (e.g., handing items to someone or taking items handed to them by others), says “Thank you,” and takes the bag.
• Parent plays the role of the barista at a café. The child approaches the counter and the parent
asks, “Hi, what can I get for you?” The child replies, “A donut and small apple juice” and hands over money. After handing back the change, the parent says, “Thank you.” and the child replies back, “Thanks.”
• Parent plays the role of teacher in the classroom, and asks the child an academic question. The
child raises their hand and waits to be called on. When the “teacher” calls on them, the child responds verbally, and the parent praises the brave talking.
Of course, it is also great to switch roles so that the child has the opportunity to play the role of storekeeper, barista, and teacher. The key to this pretend play is over-practice; the child already has a concept of what to say in these situations (this is not new to them), but in order for the speech to come easily it must be over-practiced so that it is simply a natural response to the interaction. Additionally, repeated language routines in real life frequently help the child build confidence and become verbal. For example, a family I worked with went to the same Barnes and Noble® each week to order a cookie. It became part of their routine, and, with practice, their daughter was eventually able to order a cookie independently.
•父扮演店主的角色，孩子在商店中“购买”物品。一个脚本
可能包括孩子将物品带到柜台并询问“我欠你多少钱？”在父母以价格回应之后，孩子交出了钱，这是交接接管的好习惯（例如，处理物品）对某人或他人交给他们的物品，“谢谢你”，并拿走了包。
•父母在咖啡馆扮演咖啡师的角色。孩子接近柜台和父母
问：“嗨，我能得到什么？”孩子回答说，“一个甜甜圈和小苹果汁”并交出钱。在交回更改后，父母说：“谢谢你。”孩子回答说，“谢谢。”
•家长在课堂上扮演教师的角色，并向孩子询问学业问题。该
孩子举起手，等待被召唤。当“老师”打电话给他们时，孩子会口头回应，而父母称赞勇敢的说话。
当然，转换角色也很棒，这样孩子就有机会扮演店主，咖啡师和老师的角色。这种假装游戏的关键是过度练习;孩子已经有了在这些情境下说些什么的概念（这对他们来说并不陌生），但为了使言语变得容易，必须过度练习，这样才能简单地对交互作出自然的反应。此外，现实生活中重复的语言程序经常帮助孩子建立信心并变得口头。例如，我与之合作的一个家庭每周去同一家Barnes和Noble®订购一个饼干。它成为他们常规的一部分，并且通过练习，他们的女儿最终能够独立订购饼干。
EDUCATING THE CHILD ABOUT ANXIETY
After a positive rapport has been developed with the child (this can be in the first session or may take several sessions) the next step is educating the child about selective mutism (although it is not necessary to use the specific term) and providing them with ways to communicate about anxiety. The description and psycho-education on anxiety may look very diverse depending on the age and understanding of the child. For individuals of all ages it is helpful to explain anxiety, discuss worries about speaking, and provide a scale for communication about “how hard” certain activities may be.
The steps in psycho-education include:
1. Explain anxiety. 
2. Discuss how treatment will proceed. 
3. Provide an anxiety rating scale.
For younger children:
I don’t know if your mom or dad told you, but I work with a lot of kids who have a hard time getting their words out or talking to new people. Some kids say talking is hard because they are worried about how people might react when they talk, or maybe from feeling worried that they might not say the words right or people might not understand. Worries like that can make our stomach or head hurt, or it may make the words get stuck in our throat even when we want to talk. When that happens, it is good to start working with someone like me, because I teach kids how to feel braver and stronger. We do activities to build brave muscles.
I don’t know if you have ever seen someone with REALLY big muscles, like this (show picture of weightlifter) but these people are not just born with big muscles. Instead, they started off with almost no muscles at all. They wanted to get stronger, and so they lifted weights almost every day. They could not start out with huge weights, because they were not strong enough yet, but they lifted small weights every day until they built little muscles and got a little stronger. Then, they were able to lift medium-sized weights. At first, moving up to mediumsized weights was hard. . . and they had to push, and push, and push to get the weight up. But as they practiced every day, it got easier to lift the medium-sized weights, because their muscles were growing. Then, they were able to lift big weights.
We are going to build our brave muscles in here in the same way. First, we start with brave practices that are easy, like nodding or shaking your head to answer my question. I can promise I will never make you do anything you cannot do—in fact, you get to be in charge of our brave muscle building. We will only move up to the next “weight” when you feel like you are strong enough. Your job is to work your hardest to get stronger and braver, and from what your mom and dad tell me, you are a really hard worker. The good news is that when you practice your brave work, we will have some cool prizes. Soon, the things that seemed a little hard will get easier and easier, because you will be getting stronger and stronger.
For older children/adolescents:
I met with your mom and dad recently, and they were telling me that they notice it is hard for you to talk to people sometimes in school and in public. I don’t know if you realize this, but there are a lot of kids who have difficulty talking to people in public—in fact, when you ask kids and adults what their biggest fear is, the vast majority say speaking in public. Some kids and teenagers say that it is hard to talk because they are concerned about how others might react when they talk, or they are afraid to say something wrong or have people look at them funny. There is a name for this anxiety about talking to people in school or public; it is called selective mutism.
Sometimes anxiety is a good thing. If we did not have anxiety, people might not be careful when they drive, or not study for big tests, or might not be prepared for work. A little anxiety helps keep us safe and motivated. However, sometimes our brains give us too big of a “warning signal” when we are anxious. I am not sure if you have ever been in a school when a fire alarm was pulled as a prank, but I have. Our class filed out the door and into the parking lot, because the siren was alerting us to go and we did not know that there wasn’t really a fire. Sometimes our brains send us the alarm signal when it is not really necessary. We call these “brain tricks.” The good news is, we can start controlling these brain tricks and get stronger and braver through slow practice of things that are hard.
Let me give you an example. If I were learning how to ride a bike, I would not just jump on a regular bike and ride down a huge hill. That would be way too scary. Instead, I would start with riding on a flat sidewalk with training wheels, and when that was easy I might take the training wheels off and have someone hold the back of the bike steady while I ride. When that is easy, I could ask them to let go but still ride on a flat sidewalk until I was good. Then, I would feel comfortable to ride on increasingly bigger hills, because I have practiced. The thing that seemed too hard at first (riding a regular bike down a big hill) now seems easy because I practiced the little steps slowly.
That is what I am hoping you and I can do together. My job is to help you with the slow steps —to be your coach. I will never ask you to do anything you cannot do—in fact, you get to be in charge of letting me know when you are ready to move to the next step. Your job is to try as hard as you can to be brave even when it is hard, because if you just stick in there and practice, it quickly gets easier and easier, until it is not hard at all anymore.
It is important to remember that education on anxiety is not something you do one single time. These statements will need to be repeated and revisited with children several times. The more kids understand why they are practicing and what the eventual goal is (for them to feel braver and stronger), the more internally motivated they are. At times, it is helpful to use a visual representation similar to the conceptualization of selective mutism. I use an “avoidance cycle” and “brave cycle” to teach older children about the reasoning behind brave practices.

教育孩子关于焦虑
在与孩子建立了积极的关系（这可能是在第一次会议或可能需要几次会议）之后，下一步是教育孩子选择性缄默症（虽然没有必要使用特定术语）并为他们提供关于焦虑的沟通方式。焦虑的描述和心理教育可能看起来非常多样化，取决于孩子的年龄和理解。对于所有年龄段的个人来说，解释焦虑，讨论对口语的担忧以及提供关于某些活动可能“有多难”的沟通的量表是有帮助的。
心理教育的步骤包括：
1.解释焦虑。
2.讨论如何进行治疗。
3.提供焦虑评定量表。
对于年幼的孩子：
我不知道你的妈妈或爸爸是否告诉过你，但是我和很多孩子一起工作，他们很难说出来或者和新人交谈。有些孩子说说话很难，因为他们担心人们在谈话时会有什么反应，或者担心他们可能不会说正确的话或人们可能不理解。这样的担心可能会使我们的胃或头部受伤，或者即使我们想说话，也可能会使话语卡在我们的喉咙里。当发生这种情况时，开始与像我这样的人一起工作是很好的，因为我教孩子们如何更勇敢和更强壮。我们开展活动来锻炼勇敢的肌肉。
我不知道你是否见过像这样的大肌肉的人（展示举重运动员的照片），但这些人不仅仅是天生就有大块肌肉。相反，他们开始几乎没有任何肌肉。他们想要变得更强壮，所以他们几乎每天都举重。他们不能从巨大的重量开始，因为他们还不够强壮，但他们每天都举起小重量，直到他们建立一点肌肉并且变得更强壮。然后，他们能够提升中等重量。起初，升级到中等重量很难。 。 。他们不得不推动，推动和推动以增加体重。但是当他们每天练习时，因为他们的肌肉在增长，所以更容易抬起中等重量的体重。然后，他们能够举起大重量。
我们将以同样的方式在这里建立我们勇敢的肌肉。首先，我们从容易开始的勇敢实践开始，比如点头或摇头回答我的问题。我可以保证，我永远不会让你做任何你不能做的事情 - 事实上，你必须负责我们勇敢的肌肉建设。当你觉得自己足够强壮时，我们只能提升到下一个“体重”。你的工作就是努力工作，变得更强壮，更勇敢，从你妈妈和爸爸告诉我的，你是一个非常努力的工作者。好消息是，当你练习勇敢的工作时，我们会有一些很酷的奖品。很快，看起来有点困难的事情将变得更容易和更容易，因为你会越来越强大。
适合年龄较大的儿童/青少年：
我最近遇到了你的妈妈和爸爸，他们告诉我他们注意到你很难在学校和公共场合与人交谈。我不知道你是否意识到这一点，但是有很多孩子在公共场合与人交谈很困难 - 事实上，当你向孩子和成年人询问他们最大的恐惧是什么时，绝大多数人都说在公共场合说话。有些孩子和青少年说他们很难说话，因为他们担心别人在谈话时会有什么反应，或者他们害怕说错话或让人们看起来很有趣。关于与学校或公众人士交谈的焦虑有一个名字;它被称为选择性缄默症。
有时候焦虑是一件好事。如果我们没有焦虑，人们在开车时可能不会小心，或者不进行大型测试，或者可能没有为工作做好准备。有点焦虑有助于保持我们的安全和积极性。然而，当我们焦虑时，有时候我们的大脑给了我们太大的“警告信号”。我不确定你是否曾经在学校里当火灾报警器作为恶作剧被拉，但我有。我们的班级出门进了停车场，因为警笛警告我们走了，我们不知道没有真正的火灾。有时我们的大脑会在没有必要时向我们发送警报信号。我们将这些称为“大脑技巧”。好消息是，我们可以开始控制这些大脑技巧，并通过缓慢练习那些艰难的事情来变得更加强大和勇敢。
让我举一个例子。如果我正在学习如何骑自行车，我不会只是跳上普通的自行车而是骑在一个巨大的山坡上。那太可怕了。相反，我会开始骑在带有训练轮的平坦人行道上，当这很容易时，我可能会取下训练轮，并且当我骑车时，有人会保持自行车的后部稳定。如果这很容易，我可以让他们放手，但仍然骑在平坦的人行道上，直到我好。然后，我会觉得骑在越来越大的山上会很舒服，因为我练习过。一开始看起来太难的事情（在一个大山上骑一辆普通的自行车）现在看起来很容易，因为我慢慢地练习了一些小步骤。
这就是我希望你和我能在一起做的事情。我的工作是帮助你采取缓慢的步骤 - 成为你的教练。我绝不会要求你做任何你不能做的事情 - 事实上，当你准备好进入下一步时，你需要负责让我知道。你的工作就是尽可能努力地勇敢，即使在艰难时也要勇敢，因为如果你只是坚持在那里练习，它会很快变得更容易，更容易，直到它不再那么难。
重要的是要记住，焦虑教育不是你一次性做的事情。这些陈述需要多次重复并与孩子一起重访。越多的孩子理解他们为什么练习以及最终的目标是什么（让他们感到更勇敢和更强壮），他们的内心动机就越多。有时，使用类似于选择性缄默症概念化的视觉表示是有帮助的。我使用“回避周期”和“勇敢的周期”来教育年龄较大的孩子勇敢实践背后的原因。

The Avoidance Cycle 逃避循环
Next, kids are taught to assess and report their own anxiety level. A five-point scale provides enough information without being overwhelming to children. For younger children and visual learners, I use a visual 1-5 scale. This may take the form of a mercury thermometer or a progression of five faces (progressing from happy to sad). The Incredible 5-Point Scale is a wonderful resource for assisting kids in visually understanding how to rate their anxiety (Dunn Buron, 2007). I generally do not ask children to rate how “scary” or “anxiety-provoking” an activity is, as many children with selective mutism do not describe feelings of “fear” or “anxiety.” Instead, children are asked how “hard” they think it will be or how “hard” it really was. Ratings occur at four different time points in treatment:
• At the start of treatment, to help build a step-wise ladder (communication ladder) of communication activities. It is helpful to know what the child perceives as especially hard, since my estimation of the difficulty level of the activity and their perception may not be the same.
• Prior to “brave practices”—“Okay, we get to practice answering a short question from Ms. Mensel.
How hard do you think this will be?”
• After a “brave practice” has been completed—“That was great. Now tell me how hard it really was
to answer that question from Ms. Mensel.”

接下来，教孩子们评估和报告他们自己的焦虑水平。五分制可以提供足够的信息，而不会给孩子们带来压力。对于年幼的孩子和视觉学习者，我使用视觉1-5级。这可能采取水银温度计的形式或五个面孔的进展（从快乐到悲伤）。令人难以置信的5点量表是一个很好的资源，可以帮助孩子在视觉上理解如何评价他们的焦虑（Dunn Buron，2007）。我一般不会要求孩子评价一种活动是如何“吓人”或“引起焦虑”，因为许多有选择性缄默症的孩子并没有描述“恐惧”或“焦虑”的感觉。相反，孩子们会被问到“难”。他们认为这将是真正的或者有多么“难”。评分发生在治疗的四个不同时间点：
•在治疗开始时，帮助建立沟通活动的阶梯式阶梯（沟通阶梯）。知道孩子认为特别难的是有帮助的，因为我对活动的难度和他们的感知的估计可能不一样。
•在“勇敢的做法”之前 - “好的，我们练习回答Mensel女士的一个简短问题。
你认为这会有多难？“
•在“勇敢的练习”完成之后 - “那很棒。现在告诉我它真的有多难
从Mensel女士那里回答这个问题。“
The Brave Cycle

• As a summary of progression in treatment, such as a reminder of how far the child has come—“Do you remember that answering me used to be a 4, but now you have told me that it is down to a 1. You have gotten so much braver and stronger. You are really building those brave muscles.”
Asking a child to report how hard they believe an activity will be and how hard it really was provides an opportunity for feedback on the “brain tricks” mentioned earlier. A key characteristic of anxiety disorders is an over-estimation of how bad the feared activity will be. Ninety percent of the time, children will respond that the actual practice was much easier than they had expected it to be, and it allows the adult to respond, “Wow—that practice ended up being easier than you thought it would be. We should remember this—our brains sometimes trick us in to believing that our brave practices will be harder than they really end up being. Next time you think a practice will be hard, can I remind you of this experience and how you are a lot braver than you think?”
Of course, all kids have the occasional experience of a practice that is just as hard as, or even harder, than they had hypothesized. When that occurs, adults can again provide helpful, constructive feedback including:
“Okay, it is good for us to know that answering Ms. Mensel was as hard as you thought it was going to be. I am so impressed that even though you thought it was going to be a 3, and you were right in your rating, you were still able to do it. That just shows what a brave kid you are, that you will try something even though it is kind of hard. That is the kind of practice that makes us so much braver and stronger.”
Or: “So you had thought it would be a 3, but when you really went up to answer Ms. Mensel, it jumped up to a 5. Yikes. Let’s think of a way that you could still practice being brave, but maybe something a little easier than answering with two words. Maybe we could have you answer with one short word or just a sound, or maybe we could have Ms. Mensel turn away from you as you answer. What do you think?”
•作为治疗进展的总结，例如提醒孩子已经到了多远 - “你还记得回答过去曾经是4岁，但是现在你告诉我它已经下降到了1岁。你有得到了这么多的勇敢和坚强。你真的正在建立那些勇敢的肌肉。“
要求孩子报告他们认为某项活动有多难以及实际上有多难，这为前面提到的“大脑技巧”提供了反馈机会。焦虑症的一个关键特征是高估了恐惧活动的严重程度。百分之九十的时间，孩子会回答说实际练习比他们预期的要容易得多，并且它允许成年人做出回应，“哇 - 这种练习最终比你想象的要容易。我们应该记住这一点 - 我们的大脑有时会诱使我们相信我们的勇敢实践会比他们真正最终成为更难。下次你认为练习会很困难时，我能否提醒你这种经历以及你比你想象的更勇敢？“
当然，所有孩子偶尔会有一种与他们假设的一样艰难甚至更难的练习经历。当发生这种情况时，成年人可以再次提供有益的建设性反馈，包括：
“好的，我们知道回答Mensel女士的想法和你想象的一样难。我印象非常深刻，即使你认为它会是3，你的评分是对的，你仍然可以做到。这只是表明你是一个勇敢的孩子，你会尝试一些东西，即使它有点难。这种做法让我们变得更加勇敢和坚强。“
或者：“所以你以为它会是一个3，但是当你真的回答Mensel女士时，它会上升到5.Yikes。让我们想一想你仍然可以练习勇敢的方式，但也许比用两个单词回答要容易一些。也许我们可以让你用一个简短的单词或只是一个声音来回答，或者也许我们可以让Mensel女士在回答时离开你。你怎么看？”


CONTINGENCY MANAGEMENT
I know, I know—you have already tried reward systems, and they have not worked. Many parents report to me that they have tried reward systems in the past. They offered their child a new iPod® and a pony if the child would just talk. . . but that still did not work to increase speech. If you are reading this book, you have probably already realized that for most children with selective mutism, reward systems by themselves are useless. However, contingency management can be a very useful tool in conjunction with a good intervention plan.
Contingency management: Making verbalizations more rewarding and nonverbal responding or a lack of responding less rewarding.
We have all done it. We have all made it very easy for the child to get what they want and need, and to convey information via facial expressions, writing, nonverbal gestures, or another mode of silent communication. This allowance does help the child become comfortable and successful in the school setting. It does not, nonetheless, increase verbalizations. I recently had a session with a third grader with selective mutism. We were discussing his progression to talking to peers in school and a few specific adults, but he has yet to speak to his teacher. When I asked him what was keeping him from including his teacher in his “talking circle,” he replied, “She gives me the white board and lets me write all of my answers.” This teacher was making nonverbal responding very rewarding for him.
There are many ways of utilizing contingency management when working with kids with selective mutism. First, we need to offer them the opportunity to talk, usually through asking questions that prompt or encourage a verbal response. The best way to do this is through forced-choice (or multiple- choice) questions. When children with selective mutism are asked a question in a yes/no format, it immediately and naturalistically offers up a nonverbal response (nodding or shaking their head). When they are ask a question in an open-ended manner, it may be overwhelming—the child may be caught trying to decide how to respond, what the “correct” response is, what the asker really wants to hear, etc. Instead, if the child is provided with a few options for a response, we increase the likelihood that he or she will answer verbally. Trying to change our questions to forced-choice takes some practice. Let us try changing a few yes/no and open-ended questions to forced-choice questions.
应急管理
我知道，我知道 - 你已经尝试过奖励制度，而且他们没有工作过。许多家长向我汇报他们过去曾尝试过奖励系统。如果孩子只是说话，他们会给孩子一个新的iPod®和一匹小马。 。 。但这仍然无法增加言论。如果你正在读这本书，你可能已经意识到，对于大多数有选择性缄默的孩子来说，奖励制度本身是无用的。但是，应急管理可以成为一个非常有用的工具，与良好的干预计划相结合。
应急管理：使言语能力更有价值，非语言反应或缺乏回应而不那么有益。
我们都做到了。我们都让孩子很容易得到他们想要和需要的东西，并通过面部表情，写作，非语言手势或其他静默沟通方式传达信息。这项津贴确实有助于孩子在学校环境中获得舒适和成功。尽管如此，它并没有增加言语能力。我最近与三年级学生一起选择性缄默症。我们正在讨论他在学校和一些特定成年人中与同龄人交谈的进展，但他还没有和他的老师说话。当我问他是什么让他不让他的老师加入他的“谈话圈子”时，他回答道，“她给了我白板，让我写下我所有的答案。”这位老师正在做非语言回应对他非常有益。
在与选择性缄默症的孩子一起工作时，有很多方法可以利用应急管理。首先，我们需要为他们提供谈话的机会，通常是通过提出提示或鼓励口头答复的问题。最好的方法是通过强制选择（或多选）问题。当选择性缄默症的儿童被问及是/否格式的问题时，它立即和自然地提供非语言反应（点头或摇头）。当他们以开放式的方式提问时，可能会让人感到压力 - 孩子可能会被抓住，试图决定如何回应，“正确”的反应是什么，提问者真正想要听到的是什么，等等。如果为孩子提供了一些回答选项，我们会增加他或她口头回答的可能性。试图将我们的问题改为强制选择需要一些练习。让我们尝试将一些是/否和开放式问题改为强制选择问题。

Open-Ended Example: “What did you do this weekend?” 
Forced Choice Question: “Did you ride your bike, play videogames, or something different this weekend?” 
Yes/No Example: “Do you like dogs?” 
Forced Choice Question: “Do you like dogs or not like dogs?” 
Open-Ended Question: “What is your favorite color?” 
Forced Choice Question:
Open-Ended Question: “How is your little brother feeling?” 
Forced Choice Question:Yes/No Question: “Did you dress up this year for Halloween? 
Forced Choice Question: Yes/No Question: “Do you want to work on your math right now? 
Forced Choice Question:

开放式示例：“这个周末你做了什么？”
强迫选择问题：“这个周末你骑自行车，玩电子游戏还是其他不同的东西？”
是/否示例：“你喜欢狗吗？”
强迫选择问题：“你喜欢狗还是不喜欢狗？”
开放式问题：“你最喜欢的颜色是什么？”
强迫选择问题：
开放式问题：“你的小弟弟感觉如何？”
强迫选择问题：是/否问题：“你今年为万圣节装扮了吗？
强迫选择问题：是/否问题：“你现在想要数学吗？
强迫选择问题：

Beware—sometimes we may not provide the “right” response, and the child may not answer. If the child does not respond, you may first want to change your possible answers. For example, if you ask a child, “What do you like best—dogs or cats?” and the child does not like either dogs or cats, they may not answer you. You may need to revise the question to, “What do you like better—dogs, cats, both, or neither?”
When a child responds to a forced-choice question, that response should first be reflected. Reflection consists simply of rewording or repeating the child’s response back to him. Then, the adult verbally reinforces the response. It is always important to reinforce the child verbally and through your body language. Many children with SM do not like to receive a lot of overt praise for their brave behaviors. They fear people making a big deal out of their talking, which is one of the reasons they avoid speech. In a recent workshop, a participant described a situation in which a child with SM in her school had finally spoken to the teacher. In her excitement, the teacher stopped class immediately, brought everyone’s attention to the child and congratulated him with a huge amount of praise for talking, cancelled the rest of the class day, and threw a party. The child did not return to school for two weeks. . . and when he did return he never spoke again. Please don’t be that teacher.
Verbal reinforcement should be relatively low-key and matter-of-fact, such as saying, “Thanks for letting me know” or “Great job using your brave voice.” In order not to call attention to the child, I may just give a thumbs-up or a pat on the back, or just whisper in their ear what a great job they did.
A sample interaction consisting of forced-choice questions, reflections, and labeled praise for responding could include:
请注意 - 有时我们可能无法提供“正确”的回复，而且孩子可能无法回答。如果孩子没有回应，您可能首先想要更改您的答案。例如，如果你问一个孩子，“你最喜欢什么狗或猫？”而且孩子不喜欢狗或猫，他们可能不会回答你。你可能需要修改这个问题，“你更喜欢什么 - 狗，猫，两者，或两者都没有？”
当孩子对强制选择问题作出回应时，应首先反映该回答。反思只是简单地重复或重复儿童对他的回应。然后，成年人口头强化了反应。通过口头和肢体语言强化孩子是非常重要的。许多SM患儿不喜欢因勇敢的行为而受到很多公开表扬。他们害怕人们在说话时大肆宣传，这是他们避免言论的原因之一。在最近的一次研讨会上，一位与会者描述了一种情况，即学校里有SM的孩子终于和老师说过了。在她的兴奋中，老师立即停课，引起了所有人对孩子的注意，并祝贺他在谈话中获得了巨大的赞誉，取消了上课的其余时间，并举办了派对。孩子没有回到学校两个星期。 。 。当他回来时，他再也没有说过话。请不要当那位老师。
口头强化应该是相对低调和事实上的事实，例如说“谢谢你让我知道”或“很棒的工作使用你勇敢的声音。”为了不引起对孩子的注意，我可能只是给竖起大拇指或轻拍在他们的背上，或者只是耳边低语他们做得很棒。
由强制选择问题，反思和响应标记的赞美组成的示例交互可包括：

Mom: What would you like to do today—go to the park, play on the trampoline, or something different? 
Child: Go to the park. 
Mom: Go to the park! Thanks for letting me know. I love going to the park. Should we go to Whittier Park or the park downtown? 
Child: I want to go to the one with the big slides. 
Mom: Oh, the one with the big slides—that is a really fun one. That’s Whittier Park. Are you going to try going down the biggest slide, or the medium-sized slides? 
Child: I’m going to go down the biggest one this time. 
Mom: Thanks for telling me that you want to go on the biggest one. You are getting so brave.
妈妈：今天你想做什么 - 去公园，玩蹦床，还是别的什么？
孩子：去公园。
妈妈：去公园！谢谢你让我知道。我喜欢去公园。我们应该去惠蒂尔公园还是市中心的公园？
孩子：我想去一个有大幻灯片的人。
妈妈：哦，那个有大滑梯的人 - 这真的很有趣。那是惠蒂尔公园。你打算试试最大的幻灯片，还是中型幻灯片？
孩子：这次我要去最大的一个。
妈妈：谢谢你告诉我你要继续做最大的一个。你变得如此勇敢。

After we have increased the likelihood that the child will respond to us verbally, we must have a reinforcement system in place. The most common reinforcers or rewards are:
• Obtaining desired outcome—the child gets what they want through verbal communication as
opposed to using nonverbal communication to get all needs met.
• Verbal Reinforcement—verbal praise or body language suggesting pleasure/proudness.
• Tangible Reinforcement—prizes such as toys, special outings, or belongings.
• Reinforcement through privileges—privileges the child would not normally receive, such as staying up later, watching extra TV or playing extra videogames, picking out a game to play with their mother, maintenance of their cell phone/car/computer, etc.
Reinforcement in the form of privileges or tangible items best comes through a structured reward system. This could take the form of earning “brave bucks,” stickers, poker chips, etc. for brave behaviors. It is important to define what the child is specifically working on—do they earn stickers for making sounds? Whispering? Blowing air? Do these culminate in a reward after earning a certain number? Is this “reward” really rewarding to the child?
While parents and interventionists may want to start off rewarding more frequently occurring behaviors, such as nonverbal communication, in order to get the child invested and responsive to the reward system, it is important that the reward system switches quickly to reinforcements only for verbal behaviors.
在我们增加了孩子口头回应我们的可能性之后，我们必须建立一个强化系统。最常见的强化物或奖励是：
•获得理想的结果 - 孩子通过口头交流获得他们想要的结果
反对使用非语言交流来满足所有需求。
•口头强化 - 口头表达赞美或肢体语言表示愉快/自豪。
•有形加固 - 奖品，如玩具，特殊郊游或随身物品。
•通过特权 - 儿童通常不会获得的特权加强，例如熬夜，看额外的电视或玩额外的电子游戏，挑选游戏与母亲一起玩，维护手机/汽车/电脑等。
特权或有形物品形式的强化最好通过结构化的奖励系统来实现。这可以采取赢得“勇敢的钱”，贴纸，扑克筹码等勇敢行为的形式。重要的是要定义孩子的具体工作 - 他们是否能获得制作声音的贴纸？耳语？吹空气？在获得一定数量后，这些奖励最终会获得奖励吗？这种“奖励”真的对孩子有益吗？
虽然父母和干预主义者可能想要开始奖励更频繁发生的行为，例如非语言交流，为了让孩子投入并对奖励系统做出反应，重要的是奖励系统很快转换为仅用于言语行为的增援。


Here are some examples of contingency management with a child:
Shawn is a 5-year-old boy with selective mutism who loves Legos®. When starting the intervention, his mother was instructed to stop purchasing Lego sets for any reason other than rewards for brave behaviors (i.e., no Legos as Christmas gifts, gifts from family members, etc.). Since Shawn was already consistently nonverbally responding to the psychologist during the first session, the psychologist explained that the brave work today would be blowing air (since this is a pre-requisite to speech). The psychologist and Shawn did several activities to practice, including cotton ball races, straw painting, and blowing up balloons. For each blow, Shawn earned a Lego- themed sticker, with the understanding that if he earned ten stickers in the session (a number the psychologist felt he could likely accomplish), he would earn a desired Lego set. With each blow, the psychologist also made comments such as, “Wow, you are great at brave work.” “You are such a great air blower.” and “I love how loudly you are blowing.” as well as thumbs up and lots of smiles and engagement. At the end of the session, when Shawn reached ten stickers, he was immediately given his new Lego set.
Gina is a 6-year-old girl who enjoys dressing up as a princess. She very occasionally whispers a response in the school setting if the interaction is one-on-one, and the school and parents wish to increase this speech. The social worker makes a cardboard “necklace” with several small pieces of Velcro®, and the teacher is given many beautiful “jewels” with Velcro on the back. Each time Gina whispers to anyone at school, she immediately receives a jewel to add to her necklace, and her goal is to fill up the necklace by the end of the day to obtain a prize from her mother when she returns home.
Stephanie is a 14-year-old girl whose behavior is reinforced by time on her iPad®. Her time on the iPad is earned by the number of questions and answers she gives in class that day. Her parents and teachers have set up a system by which they all have access to a private Google® document. Each time Stephanie raises her hand to answer a question in class, or approaches her teachers with a question, comment, or need, the teachers open the Google document and record. When Stephanie arrives home, her parents check the Google document and she is given ten minutes of play time for each verbalization to teachers.
以下是一些与孩子进行应急管理的例子：
Shawn是一个5岁的男孩，有选择性的缄默，喜欢Legos®。在开始介入时，他的母亲被指示停止购买乐高套装，除了勇敢行为的奖励之外的其他任何原因（即没有乐高积木作为圣诞礼物，来自家庭成员的礼物等）。由于肖恩在第一次会议期间已经一直对心理学家做出非智能反应，心理学家解释说今天的勇敢工作将是吹空气（因为这是演讲的先决条件）。心理学家和肖恩做了几次练习，包括棉球比赛，稻草绘画和吹气球。每次打击，Shawn都会获得一个乐高主题贴纸，并且要知道如果他在会话中获得了10个贴纸（心理学家认为他可能完成的数字），他将获得所需的Lego套装。每次打击，心理学家都会发表评论，例如“哇，你在勇敢的工作中表现得很好。”“你是一个伟大的鼓风机。”和“我喜欢你大声吹嘘。”以及竖起大拇指和很多微笑和订婚。在会议结束时，当Shawn达到十张贴纸时，他立即获得了新的乐高套装。
吉娜是一个6岁的女孩，喜欢打扮成公主。如果互动是一对一的话，她偶尔会在学校环境中低声回答，学校和家长希望增加这一演讲。这位社会工作者用几块小巧的Velcro®做了一条纸板“项链”，老师给了许多带有魔术贴的美丽“珠宝”。每当吉娜在学校的任何人耳语时，她立即收到一颗宝石加入她的项链，她的目标是在一天结束时填满项链，以便在她回到家时获得她母亲的奖品。
斯蒂芬妮是一个14岁的女孩，她的iPad®上的表现得到了加强。她在iPad上的时间是通过她当天在课堂上提出的问题和答案的数量来获得的。她的父母和老师已经建立了一个系统，通过该系统，他们都可以访问私人Google®文档。每当斯蒂芬妮举手回答课堂上的问题，或者向老师提出问题，评论或需求时，教师都会打开Goog​​le文档并进行录制。当斯蒂芬妮回到家时，她的父母会检查谷歌文件，并给每位教师提供十分钟的游戏时间。

There are many possible pit-falls of reward systems. The most common ones include:
• Rewarding with identified reinforcers without the occurrence of the goal behavior (e.g., if Shawn’s grandparents had purchased three Lego sets for him on his birthday, Legos may no longer be rewarding).
• Trying to use rewards that are not reinforcing for the child—if a child does not really care if they use the iPad, it is unlikely that they will work for that particular reward.
• Not changing the reward system periodically—everything gets old eventually, even access to iPads. Reward systems must be consistently changed and updated (i.e., changes in reinforcers as well as criteria/behaviors to be reinforced as the child progresses).
• Inconsistency in doling out the reward—rewards should be as immediate as possible. I realize that life is busy, and you don’t always have time to run to the store or take the child out for a special dinner. Imagine, however, that you worked all week for a paycheck, and then your boss “did not have time” or “forgot” to pay you. Most adults would not continue to put forth effort to work at that establishment.
• Making the goal behavior too difficult to accomplish—the goal behavior for reward systems MUST be attainable. If it is not, it will only frustrate you and the child.
• Giving the feared back-handed compliment, “I like how you used your voice with grandma on the phone today. Why could you not do that before?”
Some ideas for rewards (circle any that might be rewarding to your child or the child you are working with):
• Candy
• Money
• Staying up 15 minutes later
• Slurpee® from 7 Eleven®
• Chuckie Cheese® (plus $10 for tokens)
• Pick restaurant
• Eat dessert for dinner
• Extra “special time” with parents
• Go to library
• Go to toy store (with $15 to spend)
• Go bowling
• Ice cream
• Extra TV time
• Extra video game time
• Extra computer time
• Trip to McDonalds® (or favorite restaurant)
• Pick what is cooked for dinner
• Buy new video game
• Rent DVD
• Rent video game
• Go to the movies
• Pick out of surprise prize box
• Package of gum
• Make popcorn
• Go to water park
• Go to a bounce house
• Family game night
• _______________________________
• _______________________________
• _______________________________
• _______________________________

奖励制度有许多可能的陷阱。最常见的包括：
•在未发生目标行为的情况下对已识别的强化物进行奖励（例如，如果Shawn的祖父母在他生日那天为他购买了三套乐高套装，乐高积木可能不再有回报）。
•尝试使用不会对孩子有益的奖励 - 如果孩子不关心他们是否使用iPad，那么他们不太可能为那个特定的奖励而工作。
•不定期更改奖励系统 - 最终一切都变旧，甚至可以访问iPad。奖励系统必须不断变化和更新（即强化者的变化以及随着孩子的进步而加强的标准/行为）。
•奖励奖励的不一致应尽可能即时。我意识到生活很忙，你并不总是有时间去商店或带孩子去吃特别的晚餐。但是，想象一下，你整个星期都在薪水工作，然后你的老板“没时间”或“忘记”付钱给你。大多数成年人不会继续努力在该机构工作。
•使目标行为难以实现 - 奖励系统的目标行为必须是可以实现的。如果不是，它只会让你和孩子感到沮丧。
•给予可怕的反手恭维，“我喜欢你今天在电话中使用奶奶的声音。你以前为什么不这样做？“
奖励的一些想法（圈出任何可能对您的孩子或您正在与之合作的孩子有益的奖励）：
• 糖果
•钱
•15分钟后熬夜
•7Eleven®的Slurpee®
•ChuckieCheese®（加上10美元的代币）
•挑选餐厅
•晚餐吃甜点
•与父母一起额外的“特殊时间”
•去图书馆
•去玩具店（花15美元）
• 打保龄球
• 冰淇淋
•额外的电视时间
•额外的视频游戏时间
•额外的计算机时间
•前往麦当劳®（或最喜欢的餐厅）
•选择晚餐时烹制的食物
•购买新的视频游戏
•租DVD
•租借视频游戏
• 去看电影
•挑出惊喜奖品盒
•口香糖包装
•制作爆米花
•去水上乐园
•去跳房子
•家庭游戏之夜

TOOLS OF THE TRADE
Research continually demonstrates that the most effective intervention for selective mutism is behavioral treatment using desensitization (Oerbeck, 2013; Vecchio, 2009). Behavioral interventions are effective in reducing anxiety and increasing verbal communication. In a study on the effectiveness of interventions for selective mutism, the researchers compared behavioral intervention to other treatment types, including medication, family systems therapy, and psychodynamic interventions (Pionek Stone, 2002). The study found that behaviorally oriented treatments show the largest improvements. The data also indicated that intervening soon after symptoms emerge leads to larger improvements than waiting to treat. Overall, age of symptom onset, speed of intervention after onset, and quality of treatment were the most important factors leading to increased speech.
In a recent study, Bergman and colleagues (2013) examined the effectiveness of behavior therapy for selective mutism. The children who participated had moderate to severe symptom levels. After treatment using this behavioral approach, parents and teachers reported that the children had increased their communication and were speaking more at school. Parents also noted that the children’s anxiety had decreased. These results were corroborated by blind raters (raters who were unfamiliar with the children and whether they had received treatment or no treatment). The researchers followed up with the children three months after treatment and found that gains were maintained.
Behavioral intervention is based on desensitization, or slow, systematic steps toward facing a fear. Currently, the reason that the child with selective mutism is not speaking is because their fear is so great and the prompts and demands placed on them exceed their ability to manage their anxiety and respond. However, these prompts and demands can be decreased to a manageable level, which allows for success and increases motivation.
Desensitization for selective mutism is not so different from desensitization to any other fear. For example, if a child was afraid of dogs, a parent could practice slow steps with the child to increase her confidence and decrease anxiety about dogs. It is important that these steps start easy and get progressively more difficult or anxiety-provoking. Steps might include:
1. Thinking about dogs 
2. Looking at pictures or videos of dogs 
3. Watching real dogs who are far away 
4. Getting progressively closer to a dog 
5. Touching the dog 
6. Petting, feeding, and taking the dog for a walk 
工具
研究不断表明，对选择性缄默症最有效的干预是使用脱敏的行为治疗（Oerbeck，2013; Vecchio，2009）。行为干预有效减少焦虑和增加言语交流。在一项关于选择性缄默症干预措施有效性的研究中，研究人员将行为干预与其他治疗类型进行了比较，包括药物治疗，家庭系统治疗和心理动力干预（Pionek Stone，2002）。该研究发现，行为导向治疗显示出最大的改善。数据还表明，症状出现后不久就会进行干预，导致比等待治疗更大的改善。总体而言，症状发作年龄，发病后干预速度和治疗质量是导致言语增加的最重要因素。
在最近的一项研究中，Bergman及其同事（2013）研究了行为疗法对选择性缄默症的有效性。参与的儿童有中度至严重的症状水平。在使用这种行为方法治疗后，家长和老师报告说，孩子们增加了沟通，并且在学校说得更多。家长们也注意到孩子们的焦虑情绪有所下降。盲人评估者（不熟悉儿童以及他们是否接受过治疗或未接受治疗的评估者）证实了这些结果。研究人员在治疗三个月后对这些孩子进行了随访，并发现维持了收益。
行为干预是基于脱敏，或面对恐惧的缓慢，系统的步骤。目前，选择性缄默症的孩子不说话的原因是因为他们的恐惧是如此之大，并且对他们的提示和要求超过了他们管理焦虑和反应的能力。然而，这些提示和要求可以降低到可管理的水平，这允许成功并增加动力。
选择性缄默症的脱敏与脱敏到任何其他恐惧都没有那么不同。例如，如果孩子害怕狗，父母可以与孩子一起练习慢步，以增加她的信心并减少对狗的焦虑。重要的是，这些步骤开始变得容易并逐渐变得更加困难或引起焦虑。步骤可能包括：
1.思考狗
2.看着狗的照片或视频
3.看着远方的真正的狗
4.逐渐接近狗
5.抚摸狗
6.抚摸，喂养和带狗散步

With each step, we would expect increased anxiety, but as long as it was a manageable step, and as long as the practice was consistent, the individual would begin to relax and perform that step with confidence. We would then know that it was time to take the next step. In order for the step to be manageable, we may need to break it down into smaller steps, such as looking at cartoon/silly pictures of dogs, real pictures of dogs, cartoon videos of dogs, real videos of dogs, and then real videos of the dogs the child actually comes into contact with.
Desensitization of selective mutism works in a very similar manner. Instead of focusing on the end result (talking to many different people), we focus first on a small step that the child can perform, and move slowly toward more complex, difficult behaviors. There are two main “tools” in the desensitization toolbox of the clinician: stimulus fading and shaping.
Stimulus fading is a process by which the clinician takes pre-existing speech and transfers that speech to new places and new people. The goal of stimulus fading is to change where, when, and with whom the child communicates. Shaping involves reinforcing successive approximations of speech, starting with the way in which the child is currently able to communicate. The goal of shaping is slowly increasing what the child is able to communicate. We can determine the most effective intervention(s) based on the diagnostic interview and evaluation completed in the assessment phase.
每一步，我们都会期待更多的焦虑，但只要这是一个可控制的步骤，并且只要练习是一致的，个人就会开始放松并自信地执行这一步骤。然后我们就知道是时候采取下一步了。为了使步骤易于管理，我们可能需要将其分解为更小的步骤，例如查看狗的卡通/傻图片，狗的真实照片，狗的卡通视频，狗的真实视频，然后是真实视频孩子实际上接触到的狗。
选择性缄默症的脱敏作用以非常相似的方式起作用。我们不是专注于最终结果（与许多不同的人交谈），而是首先关注孩子可以执行的一小步，然后慢慢走向更复杂，更困难的行为。临床医生的脱敏工具箱中有两个主要的“工具”：刺激褪色和塑形。
刺激褪色是临床医生采用预先存在的语音并将该语音转移到新的地方和新的人的过程。刺激消退的目标是改变孩子沟通的地点，时间和对象。塑造涉及加强语言的连续近似，从儿童当前能够进行交流的方式开始。塑造的目标是慢慢增加孩子能够沟通的内容。我们可以根据诊断访谈和评估阶段完成的评估确定最有效的干预措施。


*Adapted from (Shriver, 2011).


*改编自（Shriver，2011）。
Based on the child’s presentation of speech outside of the home, we can generally fit children into one of these five categories. Think of your child or the child you are working with—what category do they generally fall into?
_______Type 1 Kids: These children speak to most people in most places, but are hesitant, quiet, or short in their responses. They may be whisperers, and may need a fair amount of time to warm up. While the child may be a consistent responder to direct questions, especially in one-on-one situations, they don’t usually initiate (such as raising their hands in class or asking the teacher about their weekend). For these children, contingency management (or making speaking more reinforcing and silence less reinforcing) is recommended as a main intervention approach.
_______ Type 2 Kids: These children have fairly typical speech—they speak in a normal tone of voice, with long responses and even occasional or frequent initiations. They speak in this normal way in most environments, IF they are speaking to one or a few specific people. For example, they may speak to their mother in almost all environments (i.e., school, restaurants, stores, family friend’s homes) in a normal voice, but don’t direct that speech to others. For these children, stimulus fading is used to transition existing speech from the current communication partner to other new communication partners, especially in environments where the speech already occurs easily.
_______ Type 3 Kids: These children have typical speech with most people, but only in one (or limited) environments. A child with this presentation may talk to anyone who comes into their home, but that speech does not generalize to outside of the home. Alternatively, after they are comfortable in the Social Worker’s office at school they may talk to anyone who enters into that room, but as soon as the child leaves the room, all communication ceases. For these children, stimulus fading is used to transition that existing speech to new places.
_______ Type 4 Kids: These children have limited speech with only one or a few people in only one or a few places. For example, these children may talk to the speech pathologist in her office, but when anyone else enters the room OR when they leave the room, the child becomes silent again. For these children, stimulus fading is used to transition speech from current communication partners to new people as well as to move pre-existing speech to other environments.
_______ Type 5 Kids: These children generally do not speak to anyone in any environments outside of the home setting. For these children, the intervention must start with shaping in order to obtain speech, and then stimulus fading can also be used to transition this speech to new environments and with new people.
根据孩子在家庭以外的演讲，我们通常可以将孩子纳入这五个类别中的一个。想想你的孩子或你正在与之工作的孩子 - 他们通常属于哪个类别？
_______类型1孩子：这些孩子在大多数地方与大多数人说话，但他们的反应犹豫不决，安静或缺乏。他们可能是低声说话者，可能需要相当长的时间来预热。虽然孩子可能是指导问题的一致响应者，特别是在一对一的情况下，但他们通常不会发起（例如在课堂上举手或向老师询问他们的周末）。对于这些儿童，建议采取应急管理（或使发言更加强化，沉默不那么强化）作为主要干预方法。
_______类型2儿童：这些孩子有相当典型的言语 - 他们以正常的语调说话，反应很长，甚至偶尔或经常发起。如果他们与一个或几个特定的​​人交谈，他们会在大多数环境中以正常方式说话。例如，他们可以在正常的声音中在几乎所有环境（即学校，餐馆，商店，家庭朋友的家中）与母亲交谈，但不要将该讲话指向其他人。对于这些孩子，刺激衰落用于将现有语音从当前通信伙伴转移到其他新通信伙伴，特别是在语音已经容易发生的环境中。
_______ 类型 3 儿童：这些孩子与大多数人有典型的演讲，但只在一个（或有限的）环境中。有这个演讲的孩子可以和任何进入他们家的人交谈，但是这个演讲并不能概括到家庭之外。或者，在他们在学校的社会工作者办公室感到舒服之后，他们可以与进入该房间的任何人交谈，但是一旦孩子离开房间，所有通信都会停止。对于这些孩子，刺激衰落用于将现有的语音转换到新的地方。
_______ 类型4 儿童：这些孩子的言语有限，只有一个或几个人只在一个或几个地方。例如，这些孩子可以在她的办公室与语言病理学家交谈，但是当其他人进入房间或​​当他们离开房间时，孩子再次变得沉默。对于这些孩子，刺激衰落用于将语音从当前的通信伙伴转移到新的人以及将预先存在的语音转移到其他环境。
_______ 类型5 儿童：这些儿童通常不会在家庭环境之外的任何环境中与任何人交谈。对于这些孩子，干预必须从塑造开始以获得语音，然后刺激消退也可以用于将这种言语转换到新环境和新人。


STIMULUS FADING
Stimulus fading is, in my experience, the easiest and most “naturalistic” way of increasing speech for children with selective mutism, if it is a possibility given the characteristics of the child (see chart above). The general idea of fading is to obtain speech from the child using an individual with whom the child currently speaks (this may be the parent, keyworker, or other relative) and “fading” that speech into a new situation (e.g., a new environment or including a new communication partner). First, we must determine to whom the child speaks and where the child speaks.
Who does the child talk to already? This could include parents, relatives, school personnel, peers, etc.
刺激渐变
根据我的经验，刺激渐变是选择性缄默症儿童言语最简单，最“自然主义”的方式，如果考虑到孩子的特征，可能会出现这种情况（见上图）。褪色的一般想法是使用与孩子当前交谈的个人（可能是父母，关键工作者或其他亲属）获得儿童的言语，并将该言语“淡化”为新情况（例如，新环境）或包括新的沟通伙伴）。首先，我们必须确定孩子说话的对象以及孩子说话的地方。
孩子和谁说话了谁？这可能包括父母，亲戚，学校人员，同龄人等。

Already talks to:

已经说话：
人（父、母，老师）————在环境地方（
教室，学校私人办公室，学校人行道，操场）

In Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) 
in Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in 
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground)
What environments or with whom would it be helpful for speech to occur (where it does not currently occur)?

什么环境或与谁有助于语音发生（目前没有发生的地方）？

in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground) in
Person (e.g., mom, dad, teacher)
Environments (e.g., classroom, private office in school, school sidewalk, playground)
Stimulus fading allows us to take the speech that already exists, such as speaking to a parent in a closed-office setting of the school, and add in a new communication partner or move to a new environment. Examples of both adding in new communication partners and moving to new environments are included. Please note that all steps do not have to be accomplished in one day. Instead, movement to the next step should only occur when the current step seems comfortable and easy for the child. That may mean that each step takes three minutes or three hours, we must not move more quickly than the child can tolerate. Do not move to the next step of the stimulus fading procedure if the child stops talking. Instead, stop where you are and the communication partner should re-establish speech. For instance, if the child is fading into a new environment and becomes mute, extremely quiet, or generally nonresponsive, the communication partner should stop and try to re-elicit speech before moving forward. If a new person is fading into an interaction and the child becomes mute, the person fading in should stop their progression into the room (just stay where they are) and the communication partner should try to get the child engaged and talking again. Only when the child looks relatively comfortable and is speaking again should the fading restart.
The fading procedure is generally used in a naturalistic sense, meaning that the intent is not explained in detail to the child. For example, a parent might let the child know that they will be playing in Ms. Smith’s room today, and that Ms. Smith may have some work to do in the room while they are playing. If the goal of stimulus fading is to transfer speech to a new environment, the communication partner may just try to keep up the interaction, conversation, or play while slowly moving to a new area.
刺激渐变允许我们采取已经存在的说话情境，例如在学校的封闭办公室环境中与父母交谈，并添加新的通信伙伴或移动到新环境。包括添加新沟通伙伴和迁移到新环境的示例。请注意，所有步骤都不必在一天内完成。相反，只有在当前步骤看起来对孩子来说舒适且容易时，才能进行到下一步的移动。这可能意味着每个步骤需要三分钟或三个小时，我们不能比孩子能够容忍的更快地移动。如果孩子停止说话，不要进入刺激褪色程序的下一步。相反，停在你的位置，沟通伙伴应该重新建立演讲。例如，如果孩子正在淡入新环境并变得静音，非常安静或者通常没有反应，那么沟通伙伴应该停下来并尝试在前进之前重新发出语音。如果一个新人正在逐渐淡入互动并且孩子变得静音，那么逐渐消失的人应该停止他们进入房间（只是呆在他们所在的地方），并且沟通伙伴应该试着让孩子参与并再次说话。只有当孩子看起来相对舒适并再次说话时，才应重新开始褪色。
褪色程序通常以自然主义的意义使用，意味着没有详细解释儿童的意图。例如，父母可能会让孩子知道他们今天将在史密斯女士的房间里玩，并且史密斯女士在玩耍时可能会在房间里做一些工作。如果刺激衰落的目标是将语音转移到新环境，则通信伙伴可以在缓慢移动到新区域时尝试保持交互，对话或播放。

Example Stimulus Fading—New Communication Partners
The goal is to fade a new communication partner (NCP) into the room while the child continues to use appropriate speech directed toward the mother but within NCP’s earshot. The mother’s job is to keep the child talking through fun activities that encourage speech and forced-choice questions (while the NCP slowly enters the room).
• Mother and child should have some time to “warm up” in the room, playing and talking alone with
the door closed or almost closed.
• NCP begins fading into the room when the mother has obtained an appropriate volume of consistent
speech from the child. The NCP begins by simply opening the door and walking around and in front of the door, so as to make her presence known. The NCP should NOT respond in any way to what the child says or act as if they are attending to the child (no eye contact, no attention, no responses to the child’s activity or speech).
• The NCP should very slowly enter the room, as far away from the child as possible, and busy themselves (i.e., type on the computer, pick up the room, or do paperwork). If the child begins to discontinue speaking or shows other general signs of anxiety, slow the entrance or stay in the same position for several minutes until the anxiety is reduced and speech resumes.
• The NCP should slowly start making their way toward the child/mother by finding things to do in closer proximity to their interaction, but should continue to pay no attention to the child.
• When the NCP is close to the interaction and the child has maintained speech, he/she can begin silently to attend to the interaction (just watching without commenting).
• If the child tolerates attention to their speech, the NCP can begin to comment, reflect, or respond to what the child is saying. For example, if the child tells the parent that they picked a blue card, the NCP could reflect, “Oh, you picked a blue card.” If the child tells the mother that he played his new videogame last night, the NCP could comment, “You played your new game—that sounds like fun.”
• When this seems comfortable and minimally anxiety-provoking, the NCP can begin peppering in occasional forced-choice questions.
• When the child is consistently responding to the NCP, the parent can begin fading out of the room, leaving the NCP and the child. This should not be attempted until the child appears to be fairly comfortable in speaking with the NCP. If necessary, use the same gradual fading in process described above—only in reverse.
If the NCP is unable to complete all steps in one session, they could start outside the room at the next session but attempt to fade in more quickly. As the child’s anxiety will likely spontaneously return somewhat at the beginning of each session (although less and less will be present each time), the NCP should take care to be responsive to the anxiety.
示例刺激渐变 - 新通信伙伴
目标是将新的通信伙伴（NCP）淡入房间，同时孩子继续使用针对母亲但在NCP听力范围内的适当言论。母亲的工作是让孩子通过鼓励言语和强制选择问题的有趣活动（当NCP慢慢进入房间时）进行交谈。
•母亲和孩子应该有时间在房间里“热身”，独自玩耍和说话
门关闭或几乎关闭。
•当母亲获得适当的一致性时，NCP开始逐渐消失
来自孩子的演讲。 NCP开始时只需打开门，在门前和门前走动，以便让她知晓。 NCP不应以任何方式回应孩子所说的或表现为好像他们正在照顾孩子（没有目光接触，没有注意，没有回应孩子的活动或言语）。
•NCP应该非常缓慢地进入房间，尽可能远离孩子，并且自己忙碌（即，在电脑上打字，拿起房间或做文书工作）。如果孩子开始停止说话或表现出其他一般的焦虑迹象，请减慢入口或在相同位置停留几分钟，直到焦虑减少并恢复讲话。
•NCP应该通过在他们的互动中更接近地发现要做的事情慢慢开始向孩子/母亲开始，但是应该继续不关注孩子。
•当NCP接近交互并且孩子保持讲话时，他/她可以静静地开始参与交互（只是观看而不评论）。
•如果孩子容忍注意他们的言论，NCP可以开始评论，反思或回应孩子说的话。例如，如果孩子告诉父母他们选择了蓝卡，NCP可以反映：“哦，你选了一张蓝卡。”如果孩子告诉母亲他昨晚播放了他的新视频游戏，NCP可以发表评论，“你玩过你的新游戏 - 听起来很有趣。”
•当这看起来很舒服并且极其焦虑时，NCP可以在偶尔的强制选择问题中开始学习。
•当孩子一直响应NCP时，父母可以开始淡出房间，离开NCP和孩子。在孩子与NCP交谈时看起来相当舒服之前，不应该尝试这种方法。如有必要，在上述过程中使用相同的逐渐衰落 - 仅反过来。
如果NCP无法在一个会话中完成所有步骤，他们可以在下一个会话期间从会议室外开始，但尝试更快地淡入。由于孩子的焦虑可能会在每次开始时自发地有所回复（尽管每次都会越来越少），NCP应该注意对焦虑做出反应。

Example Stimulus Fading—New Environments
The goal is to transition speech from the current location to a new location, using someone with whom the child already speaks comfortably.
1. Begin in an environment that is associated with speech, such as the parent’s car. 2. Play a verbal game or engage the child in an interesting conversation to elicit speech (e.g., 20questions, I Spy, taking turns telling jokes). 
3. Instead of quickly exiting the car, move more slowly, first just opening the car door and attempting to maintain speech. 
4. Slowly exit the car, keeping the child engaged, and stay near the car. 
5. Take very slow steps toward the door, keeping the child engaged in the verbalizations. 
6. Maintain speech as long as possible, and praise the child for using their voice in a new environment. 
7. With each new stimulus fading attempt, the goal should be to move the speech further.
Fading can be used in a number of different ways. For example, fading can be used in conjunction with video or audiotaping. If a child is willing to be videotaped, the fading procedure on page 118 should be used to fade the child toward speech with a new communication partner. A similar technique could be used with the phone, FaceTime®, Skype®, and other technology.
示例刺激衰落 - 新环境
目标是将语音从当前位置转换到新位置，使用与孩子已经说话舒服的人。
1.从与语音相关的环境开始，例如父母的汽车。 2.玩一个口头游戏或让孩子参与有趣的对话以引发言语（例如，20个问题，我间谍，轮流讲笑话）。
3.而不是快速离开汽车，移动得更慢，首先只是打开车门并试图保持讲话。
4.慢慢退出汽车，让孩子保持联系，并靠近汽车。
5.朝着门走很慢的步伐，让孩子参与口头表达。
6.尽可能保持讲话，并赞扬孩子在新环境中使用自己的声音。
7.随着每次新的刺激消退尝试，目标应该是进一步推动言论。
衰落可以以多种不同方式使用。例如，衰落可以与视频或录音一起使用。如果孩子愿意录像，则应使用第118页的淡入淡出程序，让孩子在新的通讯伙伴身上淡化语言。类似的技术可以与手机，FaceTime®，Skype®和其他技术一起使用。
Example Fading via Voice Recordings
1. Teacher (or New Communication Partner—NCP) tapes herself asking a question via voice recording (the sillier the better). Voice recordings could be made on cell phones, voice recording devices, taped on an answering machine, etc. 
2. Child answers privately (at home or in a different room) on a voice recorder and asks a question (can be the same question or a different question); send to teacher and teacher responds. Continue asking and answering each other remotely via voice recording. 
3. Teacher asks a question and child responds in the room (and back and forth). 
4. Teacher slowly moves closer as child responds via voice recording. 
5. Teacher asks a question and child responds right next to her. 
6. (Fade voice recorder)—teacher asks a question while phone is sitting on desk away from face and child responds. 
7. Both pretend to hit the record button but teacher asks a question and child responds.
通过录音进行渐入渐出的示例
1.教师（或新通讯合作伙伴-NCP）通过录音自己提问（傻瓜越好）。 录音可以在手机，录音设备，录音机等录音中进行。
2.孩子在录音机上私下（在家里或在不同的房间里）回答问题（可以是相同的问题或不同的问题）; 发送给老师和老师回应。 通过录音继续远程询问和回答对方。
3.老师问一个问题，孩子在房间里回答（来回）。
4.当孩子通过录音回应时，老师慢慢靠近。
5.老师问一个问题，孩子就在她旁边做出回应。
6.（淡化录音机） - 教师问一个问题，而电话坐在桌子上远离脸，孩子回应。
两个人都假装打了记录按钮，但老师问了一个问题，孩子回答。
  
SHAPING
For those children who are not yet speaking to anyone in any environment outside of the home, whose speech is very inconsistent or extremely quiet, or who have been involved in unsuccessful stimulus fading procedures, shaping speech is the best option. Shaping (otherwise known as the building of a communication ladder) involves breaking speech down into small, manageable steps, and reinforcing the slow, steady steps toward speech. Just as we would not expect a child with an intense fear of dogs to be able to immediately approach and play with a new dog, we cannot expect a child with selective mutism to approach their teacher and ask for help. Instead, we must make the practices manageable.
A communication ladder (shaping procedure) can involve many small steps. Intervention should start where the child currently is functioning and progress up the ladder slowly but consistently. The very basis of the communication ladder may be simply following directions, especially for the child who freezes entirely in interactions and cannot even consistently respond nonverbally. The highest rung on the communication ladder is spontaneous initiation of communication and starting/maintaining conversations.
The communication ladder is based on three principals:
塑型
对于那些尚未在家庭以外的任何环境中与任何人说话的孩子，他们的言语非常不稳定或非常安静，或者参与了不成功的刺激消退程序，塑造言语是最好的选择。整形（也称为通信阶梯的构建）涉及将语音分解成小的，可管理的步骤，并加强缓慢，稳定的语音步骤。就像我们不希望一个对狗有强烈恐惧的孩子能够立即接近和玩新狗一样，我们不能指望有选择性缄默的孩子接近他们的老师并寻求帮助。相反，我们必须使这些实践易于管理。
通信阶梯（整形程序）可能涉及许多小步骤。干预应从孩子目前正在运作的地方开始，并缓慢但始终如一地向上升。沟通阶梯的基础可能只是遵循指示，特别是对于完全在交互中冻结而甚至不能始终如一地做出非语言反应的孩子。沟通阶梯的最高阶段是自发地开始沟通和开始/维持对话。
沟通阶梯基于三个原则：


Principal One: Speaking in gradual steps helps the fear go away.
a. This is called exposure, but it’s really just structured practice. It’s sort of like learning to ride a bike—at first, you start easy, with training wheels; then, parents hold on to the bike while you ride slowly with two wheels; eventually, you are riding alone slowly and then more quickly. At each step you gain confidence and that thing that was scary isn’t so scary anymore. 
b. The first step is identifying what is feared (where it is scary to speak, who it is scary to speak to, etc.). 
c. Then a ladder is created starting with least difficult scenarios (e.g., mimicking speech or nonverbal communication), going up eventually to really difficult scenarios (e.g., initiating speech with a stranger). 
d. The ladder begins in the clinic or office, and when the child is successful, that step of the ladder is generalized to other environments (e.g., in public and at school). 
e. At each step, the child gains confidence and a “scary” situation is faced, thereby making it not so difficult anymore.
要点一：逐步说话有助于恐惧消失。
A。这被称为曝光，但它实际上只是结构化练习。这有点像学习骑自行车 - 起初，你开始轻松，有训练轮;然后，当你用两个轮子慢慢骑行时，父母会坚持骑自行车;最终，你慢慢地独自骑行，然后更快。在每一步，你都会获得自信，那可怕的事情不再那么可怕了。
B。第一步是确定什么是恐惧（说话可怕的地方，可怕的人说话等等）。
C。然后从最不困难的场景（例如，模仿语音或非语言交流）开始创建梯子，最终上升到真正困难的场景（例如，与陌生人发起讲话）。 
D。梯子从诊所或办公室开始，当孩子成功时，梯子的那一步被推广到其他环境（例如，在公共场所和学校）。
E。在每一步中，孩子都会获得自信并且面临“可怕”的情况，从而使其不再那么困难。

Principal Two: Success is rewarded.
a. We all like rewards when we work hard, so communication ladders also have rewards. 
b. When successful on the current step of the ladder, children are either immediately given a small reward (e.g., very small toy/candy) or are given a token (e.g., sticker, poker chip) that they can cash in later for a slightly bigger reward. 
c. Furthermore, parents, keyworkers, and others in the child’s life give them verbal reinforcement for their “bravery.” d. Finally, it is intrinsically rewarding to be successful, and this increases motivation to continue making progress on the communication ladder.
要点二：成功得到回报。
一个。 当我们努力工作时，我们都喜欢奖励，因此沟通阶梯也有奖励。
湾 如果在梯子的当前步骤成功，孩子们要么立即获得一小笔奖励（例如，非常小的玩具/糖果），要么给予一个代币（例如贴纸，扑克筹码）以便稍后可以兑现 奖励。
C。 此外，父母，关键工作者和孩子生活中的其他人为他们的“勇敢”给予口头强化。 最后，获得成功本身就是有益的，这增加了继续在沟通阶梯上取得进展的动力。

Principal Three: Keeping up the momentum is important.
a. We can keep up the momentum by communicating about what the child has been successful on, and what “step” of the ladder he/she is currently working on (that way, we don’t have stagnation in one environment—if the child is communicating with single words in the clinic, they should be working on that step in public and in school). 
b. We can also keep up the momentum by being consistent and rewarding improvements in attempted speech.
要点三：保持这种势头很重要。
A。 我们可以通过交流关于孩子成功的内容以及他/她目前正在进行的阶梯的“步骤”来保持这种势头（这样，我们在一个环境中没有停滞 - 如果孩子是 在诊所中用单个词进行交流，他们应该在公共场所和学校中开展这一步骤）。
B. 我们还可以通过保持一致并奖励尝试演讲的改进来保持这种势头。

On the following page is a list of possible steps on the communication ladder, along with many ideas of activities that could be utilized while practicing each step. These steps should be done playfully and in a fun, interactive manner, so integrating them into play or enjoyable interaction is essential.
在下一页是通信阶梯上可能的步骤列表，以及在实践每个步骤时可以使用的许多活动想法。 这些步骤应该以有趣，互动的方式有趣地完成，因此将它们融入游戏或愉快的互动中是至关重要的。
Following directions
• Simon Says
• Arts and crafts
• Board games
• Cooking
• Dot-to-dot
• Barrier activities (activities in which two people are trying to achieve the same result without seeing each other—a physical barrier is between the two and the speaker gives instructions for the listener to create scenes, make things, or recreate a picture)
• Classroom helper
• Red light/green light game
• Scavenger hunt
• Sorting tasks
• Fun with DirectionsTM app
遵循指令
• 西门说
• 美术和工艺
•棋盘游戏
•烹饪
•点对点
•障碍活动（两个人试图在不看见彼此的情况下实现相同结果的活动 - 两者之间的物理屏障，并且发言者为听众提供创建场景，制作或重新创建图片的指示）
•课堂助手
•红灯/绿灯游戏
•寻宝游戏
•排序任务
•使用DirectionsTM应用程序很有趣


Gestures (writing, pointing, nodding/shaking head, shrugging shoulders, etc.)
• Charades
• Songs with hand movements (e.g., Itsy Bitsy Spider)
• Thumbs up/thumbs down
• Where’s Waldo® books
• I Spy
• Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS)—teaching the child to give a picture of the desired item or activity to the communication partner
• Assistive Technology Devices (technology the child can use to communicate, such as Tap To TalkTM apps or typing programs)
• Yes/no questions
• Kids on StageTM board game
• PicturekaTM board game 
• Making choices (“Do you want this one or this one?”)

手势（书写，指点，点头/摇头，耸肩等）
•Charades
•带有手部动作的歌曲（例如，Itsy Bitsy Spider）
•竖起拇指向上/向下竖起
•哪里是Waldo®书籍
• 我窥探
•图片交换通信系统（PECS） - 指导孩子向通信伙伴提供所需项目或活动的图片
•辅助技术设备（儿童可用于通信的技术，如Tap To TalkTM应用程序或键入程序）
•是/否问题
•StageTM棋盘游戏中的孩子们
•PicturekaTM棋盘游戏
•做出选择（“你想要这个还是这个？”）

Making noise (without the use of the mouth.)
• Clapping
• Stomping
• Snapping
• Musical instruments that don’t require the mouth (e.g., drums, tambourine, cymbals, etc.)
• Rain sound
• Tapping foot to the music

发出噪音（不使用嘴巴。）
•鼓掌
•踩踏
•捕捉
•不需要嘴巴的乐器（例如鼓，手鼓，钹等）
• 雨声
•轻拍音乐

Making faces
• Mirrored faces
• Making feelings faces or silly faces
• Oral-motor exercises
• Funny FacesTM board game

做鬼脸
•镜面
•制作感情面孔或傻脸
•口腔运动练习
•Funny FacesTM棋盘游戏

Blowing air
• Cotton ball races
• Bubbles
• Balloons
• Pinwheels
• Straw painting
• Blowing tissues
• Free CandleTM app
• Blow Balloon PopTM app
• Blow BlowTM app
吹空气
•棉球比赛
•泡沫
•气球
•风车
•稻草画
•吹纸巾
•免费蜡烛应用程序
•Blow Balloon Pop应用程序
•Blo Blow应用程序

Voiceless sounds (s, t, p, k, h, f, sh, ch, voiceless th)
• Snake sound
• Cotton ball race with sounds
• Flat tire sound
• Pinwheel with sounds
无声的声音（s，t，p，k，h，f，sh，ch，无声th）
•蛇声
•带有声音的棉球比赛
•轮胎爆胎声
•带声音的风车

Voiced sounds and/or environmental/animal noises
• All other sounds, but bilabials first (i.e., those sounds that do not require a large mouth opening, such as the m, b, and w sound)
浊音和/或环境/动物噪音
•所有其他声音，但首先是双唇（即那些不需要大嘴张开的声音，例如m，b和w声）

Sound combinations leading to words
• Shape discrete sounds into sound combinations and into words
• Start with y/es and n/o sounds, since they are easily functional
• y/es and n/o sounds discretely
• discrete sounds closer in proximity
• sounds combined
• mimicked yes/no
• yes/no questions with a cued response (e.g., “Are you a girl? Say yes.”)

声音组合导致单词
•将离散的声音形成声音组合和单词
•从y / es和n / o声音开始，因为它们很容易使用
•y / es和n / o声音离散
•离散的声音更接近
•声音合并
•模仿是/否
•是/否有回答提问的问题（例如，“你是女孩吗？说是的。”）


One word responses (forced choice when possible as opposed to open-ended)
• Board games 
• Making choices
• Fill in the blank or complete the sentence
• SparklefishTM app
• Super DuperTM apps (www.superduperinc.com)
• Go Fish!TM
• Hangman
• Old Maid
• BattleshipTM
• Smarty EarsTM apps (www.smartyearsapps.com)
• Hot/cold game
• What’s missing games—show the child several pictures or objects, ask them not to look while you remove one, and they guess what is missing
• UnoTM
• Counting tasks
• Fact or CrapTM card game

一个字回复（尽可能强制选择而不是开放式）
•棋盘游戏
•做出选择
•填写空白或填写句子
•SparklefishTM应用程序
•Super DuperTM应用程序（www.superduperinc.com）
•Go Fish！TM
•刽子手
•老女仆
•BattleshipTM
•Smarty EarsTM应用程序（www.smartyearsapps.com）
•热/冷游戏
•什么是缺少的游戏 - 向孩子展示几张图片或物品，让他们在你移除一张图片或物品时不要看，他们猜测丢失的是什么
•UnoTM
•计算任务
•Fact或CrapTM纸牌游戏

Multiple word responses and longer utterances
• Chinese whispers or Telephone game—one person quietly tells something to another, and the message is passed around until the last player says it aloud
• Reading, songs
• TV jingles
• “Tell me about. . .”
• Role playing
• What’s wrong pictures
• Finish the story
• Barrier games
• Carrier phrases (phrases in which the first few words remain the same and the last one changes, such as “I see a ____,” “I found a _____,” I have a ____”, and “I made a ____.”)
• Sequencing cards
• Singing

多个单词响应和更长的话语
•中国人的窃窃私语或电话游戏 - 一个人静静地向另一个人讲述一些东西，并且消息传递到最后一个玩家大声说出来
•阅读，歌曲
•电视叮当声
• “告诉我关于。。“。
• 角色扮演
•图片有什么不对
•完成故事
•障碍游戏
•载体短语（前几个单词保持不变，最后一个单词发生变化的短语，例如“我看到____”，“我找到_____”，“我有____”，“我做了____”。）
•排序卡
• 唱歌
Initiating
• Puppet PalsTM app
• Show and TellTM game
• HeadbanzTM
• 20 Questions
• Child gives you instructions (for making crafts, playing videogames, etc.)
• Taking turns asking questions
• Knock-knock jokes
• Person bingo (see page 122)
• Guess Who?TM board game
• Wordless books—telling the story
• Child interviews you
• Retelling stories
• ToontasticTM app
• Requesting help
• Story starter cards or cubes
• Communicative temptations (setting up the environment to tempt the child to communicate, such as arranging an obstacle to a desired object, “accidentally” moving the child’s piece in a board game, or not providing an important part of a craft)
• Acting out a story

启始
•Puppet PalsTM应用程序
•Show和TellTM游戏
•HeadbanzTM
•20个问题
•儿童为您提供指导（制作工艺品，玩电子游戏等）
•轮流提问
•敲敲笑话
•人物宾果游戏（参见第122页）
•猜猜谁？TM棋盘游戏
•无言的书籍 - 讲述故事
•儿童采访你
•重述故事
•ToontasticTM应用程序
•请求帮助
•故事入门卡或立方体
•交际诱惑（设置环境以诱使孩子进行交流，例如安排障碍物到期望的物体，“意外地”在棋盘游戏中移动孩子的棋子，或者不提供工艺的重要部分）
•表演故事
Starting and maintaining conversations
• First scripted, then spontaneous
• Use social stories or social skills books, such as those by Jed Baker, Ph.D. (director of the Social Skills Training Project)
• Role play
Each child is different, and will need to start at a different level with different people in different environments. First, these steps should be practiced one-on-one with new communication partners, and then the existing speech can be faded into new places and new people can be faded into the interaction. Even within these steps, smaller steps could be added if the next step produces quite a bit of anxiety and avoidance. For example, many children have difficulty blowing air but can blow up a balloon. The blowing air step could be broken down to blowing up a balloon, then cutting the tip (the part that you blow into) off of the balloon and blowing. The tip could be cut off more and more until very little of the balloon is remaining and the child is essentially blowing air. Additionally, many steps can be easily integrated into one interaction. For instance, if the child is practicing blowing a pinwheel and is doing well, the interventionist may recommend “changing how we are blowing” to the “sssss” sound or the “puhpuhpuh” sound to make the pinwheel spin. Thus, we are moving from blowing air to voiceless sounds seamlessly.
开始和维持对话
•首先编写脚本，然后自发编写
•使用社交故事或社交技巧书籍，例如Jed Baker，Ph.D。 （社会技能培训项目主任）
• 角色扮演
每个孩子都是不同的，需要在不同的环境中与不同的人开始。首先，这些步骤应该与新的沟通合作伙伴一对一地实施，然后现有的演讲可以淡入新的地方，新的人可以淡入互动。即使在这些步骤中，如果下一步产生相当多的焦虑和回避，也可以添加较小的步骤。例如，许多儿童难以吹空气但可能会炸毁气球。吹气步骤可以分解为吹气球，然后将气球（吹入的部分）切断气球并吹气。尖端可以被越来越多地切断，直到很少的气球剩余并且孩子基本上吹空气。此外，许多步骤可以轻松集成到一个交互中。例如，如果孩子正在练习吹风车并且表现良好，干预者可能会建议“改变我们如何吹”到“sssss”声音或“puhpuhpuh”声音以使风车旋转。因此，我们正在无缝地从吹风到无声的声音。

It is time to take the next step on the ladder when two criteria are met:
• The child is consistently following through with the activity with very little hesitation or prompting.
• The child does not look anxious about completing their brave work.
If you are working on one-word responses, and the child is covering his mouth each time he answers, it is not time to move to the next step. If you are blowing air and the child is only blowing air when you are working with balloons, but is unable to blow into a pinwheel or tissue, he needs more practice on this step. There is no specific number of practices or amount of time that corresponds with moving on; you must observe anxiety level and compliance.
Each new session will likely require a warm-up period. This warm-up period should consist of a reminder of the brave work completed in the last session, as well as praise for the progress made thus far. Then, the child should begin brave practices several steps below where they ended in the last session and quickly progress forward. For example, if the child ended the last session on blowing air, the next session may begin with practicing making body sounds and facial expressions.
Let us develop a communication ladder for a specific child. Imagine this being done with a new communication partner, one-on-one, in a private setting. The first step should be one which the child currently completes consistently one-on-one. If a child already uses gestures with this person consistently, don’t move back down on the ladder to following directions. If the child already makes environmental or animal sounds with the person, start there and move up the ladder. Add activity ideas that the child might particularly enjoy under each step on the communication ladder (use the ideas above to personalize it to your child, student, or patient).
当满足两个标准时，是时候在梯子上采取下一步了：
•孩子一直非常犹豫或提示，继续完成活动。
•孩子对完成勇敢的工作并不担心。
如果您正在处理一个单词的答案，并且每次他回答时孩子都在捂住嘴，那么现在就不能进入下一步了。如果你正在吹气，孩子只在吹气球时吹气，但不能吹到风车或组织，他需要更多练习。没有特定数量的做法或时间与继续进行相对应;你必须观察焦虑程度和遵守情况。
每个新会议可能需要一个预热期。这个热身期应该包括提醒上届会议完成的勇敢工作，并赞扬迄今所取得的进展。然后，孩子应该开始勇敢地练习下面几个步骤，他们在上一个会话中结束并快速前进。例如，如果孩子在吹气的情况下结束了最后一次训练，那么下一次训练可以从练习身体声音和面部表情开始。
让我们为特定的孩子开发沟通阶梯。想象一下，这是通过一个新的通信伙伴，一对一，在私人环境中完成的。第一步应该是孩子目前一对一地完成的步骤。如果孩子已经一直对这个人使用手势，请不要在梯子上向下移动到以下方向。如果孩子已经与该人发出环境或动物的声音，请从那里开始向上移动梯子。添加孩子在沟通阶梯的每个步骤中可能特别喜欢的活动想法（使用上述想法将其个性化为您的孩子，学生或患者）。

Communication Ladder for _____________________________ 
Step One: __________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Two: __________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Three: _________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Four: __________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Five: __________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Six: ___________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Seven: ________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________ Step Eight: _________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________
• ______________________________________________________________

沟通梯
步骤1
步骤2.。。。。。步骤8

When working with a child, the interventionist can use a sheet with a ladder on it, such as on page 120. First, write the current step, as well as the steps we have already completed, on the sheet. This allows the interventionist to visually demonstrate the child’s progress in the “brave ladder.” At each new session, start one to two steps back on the ladder from where the last session ended, in order to help the child “warm up” again. When working with an older child who may not like a ladder, the interventionist could draw a visual of stair steps, train tracks, or branches on a tree to illustrate movement in the direction of becoming braver and stronger.
The communication ladder generally works best at first when done without the parent in the room. When prompted to respond to a question or practice a step in the ladder, many children immediately turn to their parent to provide a response. They have become so accustomed to avoiding interactions with novel adults by looking to parents to respond and interact for them that they immediately attempt this avoidance tactic. Parents are so used to responding and communicating for the child that they may automatically answer or jump in and speak for the child. Thus, unless there is significant separation anxiety, I request that the parent return to the waiting room during the session. At the end of the session, I bring the parent back in to the room and practice the current step or goal with the parent in the room. Many times, children who were easily speaking with me without the parent in the room suddenly regress. This is NOT because of a family dynamic issue or a dislike of the parents; instead, it is likely a type of performance anxiety—the child has to become desensitized to the parent seeing them speak to me. This should be considered a normal part of the intervention process. 

在与孩子一起工作时，干预者可以使用带有梯子的工作表，例如第120页。首先，在工作表上写下当前步骤以及我们已经完成的步骤。这允许干预者在视觉上展示孩子在“勇敢的阶梯”中的进展。在每次新的训练中，在最后一次训练结束的阶梯上开始一到两步，以帮助孩子再次“热身”。当与可能不喜欢梯子的年龄较大的孩子一起工作时，干预者可以在树上画出阶梯，火车轨道或树枝的视觉，以说明朝着变得更勇敢和更强壮的方向的运动。
通信阶梯通常在没有房间中的父母的情况下最好地工作。当提示回答问题或在梯子中练习一步时，许多孩子立即转向他们的父母提供回复。他们已经习惯于通过寻求父母回应并与他们互动来避免与新成年人互动，以便他们立即尝试这种避免策略。父母习惯于为孩子做出回应和沟通，他们可以自动回答或跳入并为孩子说话。因此，除非存在明显的分离焦虑，否则我要求父母在会话期间返回候诊室。在会话结束时，我将父母带回房间并与房间中的父母一起练习当前步骤或目标。很多时候，没有父母在房间里与我交谈的孩子突然倒退了。这不是因为家庭动态问题或不喜欢父母;相反，它可能是一种表现焦虑 - 孩子必须变得对父母脱敏，看到他们对我说话。这应该被认为是干预过程的正常部分。


ESCAPE EXTINCTION PROCEDURE
Most children with selective mutism want to please others, and if manageable small goals are set and very motivating reward systems are put into place, most are quite willing to practice being brave. However, occasionally they are so used to avoiding interactions with adults that the natural inclination is to shut down and avoid brave practices. When working with these children, it can be helpful to use an escape extinction procedure. This procedure is intended to discontinue avoidance by reinforcing the child for task completion. Escape extinction should not be attempted until after a rapport is built. Generally, this intervention is used at two times:
1. If the diagnostic interview and clinical observation suggest that avoidance of speech or even participating in speech-like activities is high. 
2. If progress in shaping speech through a communication ladder is stalling.
Escape extinction starts with the development of a very obtainable goal for the session, and preferably one that can be physically prompted (such as picking something up, pointing, or nodding/shaking the head). The benefit of using a goal that can be physically prompted for the first session of escape extinction is that the interventionist knows that the behavior can be completed by the end of the session, even if through prompting. The interventionist should explain that there is work to be done in the session, and that as long as the child does the work, they will get to pick out a prize and leave the office. However, if they have a hard time, that is okay—we will practice and try again. It is important to note that when using an escape extinction procedure, the child cannot be allowed to escape a task— they must stay until the behavior is completed. An interventionist should not use this procedure unless prepared to follow through until the end.
Goals can take the form of a number of times a child needs to complete the task (e.g., pointing to three pictures in the game) or a certain amount of time (e.g., five minutes of work using a sand timer). As soon as the child completes the task or works for the set amount of time, they obtain the prize and are allowed to leave (with a lot of positive praise from the interventionist). An explanation should be given to the child, such as the following:

逃避灭绝程序
大多数有选择性缄默的孩子都想取悦别人，如果设定了可控制的小目标并且实施了非常激励的奖励制度，大多数人都非常愿意勇敢地实践。然而，偶尔他们习惯于逃避与成年人的互动，自然倾向于关闭并逃避勇敢的做法。与这些孩子一起工作时，使用消灭逃避程序会很有帮助。此程序旨在通过加强孩子完成任务来停止回避。在建立融洽关系之前，不应尝试逃避灭绝程序。通常，这种干预在这两种情况下使用：
1.如果诊断性访谈和临床观察表明避免言语甚至参与言语活动的程度很高。
2.如果通过通信阶梯塑造语音的进展停滞不前。
灭绝逃避始于为会话开发一个非常可获得的目标，并且最好是可以物理提示的目标（例如拾取，指向或点头/摇头）。使用可以物理提示第一次逃逸灭绝的目标的好处是干预者知道行为可以在会话结束时完成，即使是通过提示。干预主义者应该解释说，会议中有工作要做，只要孩子完成工作，他们就会拿出奖品离开办公室。但是，如果他们有困难，那没关系 - 我们将练习并再试一次。重要的是要注意，当使用逃避消失程序时，不允许儿童逃离任务 - 他们必须留在行为完成之前。干预主义者不应使用此程序，除非准备直到最后。
目标可以采取儿童完成任务所需的次数（例如，指向游戏中的三张图片）或一定量的时间（例如，使用沙子计时器的五分钟工作）的形式。一旦孩子完成任务或在规定的时间内工作，他们就会获得奖品并被允许离开（受到干预主义者的许多积极赞扬）。应该对孩子进行解释，例如：

“I am so excited to do our brave work today. Today, we are going to be working on pointing, and I know that this is something you are going to do so well on. As your brave coach, I promise I will never ask you to do anything that you cannot do. I am not sure if you have ever seen a sand timer before, but here is mine. As you can see, the sand runs from the top into the bottom. We have some work to do, and as long as you are working hard the sand keeps running. As soon as all of this sand is in the bottom, you are done and get to pick a prize and go back to class. If you have trouble with the work, that is okay; I will just turn the sand timer over and we will practice, and when you are ready to try again we will turn it back up.”
“今天我很勇敢地做我们勇敢的工作。今天，我们将继续指点，我知道这是你要做的事情。作为你勇敢的教练，我保证永远不会要求你做任何你不能做的事情。我不确定你以前是否见过沙子计时器，但这是我的。如您所见，沙子从顶部延伸到底部。我们还有一些工作要做，只要你努力工作，沙子就会继续运转。一旦所有这些沙子都在底部，你就完成了并获得奖品然后回到课堂上。如果你的工作有问题，那没关系;我将把沙子计时器翻过来，我们将练习，当你准备好再次尝试时，我们会把它重新打开。“

If a sand timer is used, it is important that the amount of time remaining in the sand timer represents the time during which the child needs to comply, not a visual reminder of how long is left in the session. (If used incorrectly in this way, the sand timer simply acts as a visual of how much longer the child needs to avoid.) As long as a child is complying, the sand continues to run. If the child does not comply, provide one prompt (and perhaps a reminder that there is work that needs to be done so that the child can go). If the child still does not comply, stop the sand timer and prompt again, then wait a period of time to allow the child to respond/comply. During this waiting time, it is recommended that the therapist “busy himself” by either doing paperwork or picking up—obvious waiting with sustained eye contact will likely only increase the anxiety. If the child still does not comply, give the prompt again, and either physically prompt compliance (i.e., take the child’s hand and point for them) or return to the last task that was successfully accomplished (i.e., take a step back on the communication ladder). After a few prompted practices or a few practices on a successful step, attempt the new step again. When the child is successful, immediately praise and restart the sand timer.
如果使用沙子计时器，重要的是沙子计时器中剩余的时间量表示孩子需要遵守的时间，而不是视觉提醒会话中剩余的时间。 （如果以这种方式使用不当，沙子计时器只是作为孩子需要多长时间避开的视觉。）只要孩子遵守，沙子就会继续运行。如果孩子不遵守，请提供一个提示（并且可能提醒您需要完成工作以便孩子可以去）。如果孩子仍然不遵守，停止沙子计时器并再次提示，然后等待一段时间让孩子回应/遵守。在这段等待时间内，建议治疗师通过做文书工作或采取明显的等待与持续的眼神接触来“忙碌”，这可能只会增加焦虑。如果孩子仍然不遵守，再次给出提示，要么在物理上提示遵守（即，抓住孩子的手并指出他们）或者返回到成功完成的最后一项任务（即，退回通信阶梯）。在一些成功步骤的一些提示练习或一些练习之后，再次尝试新步骤。当孩子成功时，立即称赞并重启沙子计时器。

An escape extinction procedure might take place in this manner:
逃避灭绝程序可能以这种方式发生：





If a therapist is planning to use an escape extinction procedure, they must be careful of two things: they must have the ability to wait the child out, should the child have difficulty complying, and they must set the goal at a very attainable level with a high probability of compliance. In situations when the child has great difficulty complying, I have had to stay in the session past the allotted time, and so I generally schedule these as my last session of the day.
The goal of escape extinction is to reduce the avoidance behavior and engage the child in following your directions. After a few sessions in which the interventionist obtained compliance on a task that could be physically prompted, the goal can be changed to higher-level communicative behaviors that cannot be prompted (such as blowing air or simple sounds). As long as the child remains generally compliant with the goal behaviors, the interventionist can discontinue the escape extinction and simply practice the steps in the communication ladder. In order to maintain compliance, the interventionist must take great care not to raise the expectations too quickly or set the next step in the ladder too high. Remember: never move to the next step until the child is compliant with the current ladder step and does not appear anxious or avoidant.
如果治疗师计划使用逃生灭绝程序，他们必须小心两件事：他们必须有能力等待孩子，如果孩子难以遵守，他们必须将目标设定在一个非常可达到的水平合规的可能性很高。在孩子难以遵守的情况下，我不得不在规定的时间之后继续参加会议，因此我通常将这些安排为当天的​​最后一次会议。
逃避灭绝的目标是减少避免行为并让孩子遵循你的指示。在几次会议之后，干预主义者获得了可以物理提示的任务的合规性，目标可以改变为无法提示的更高级别的交流行为（例如吹空气或简单的声音）。只要孩子仍然普遍遵守目标行为，干预主义者就可以停止逃避豁免并简单地实践沟通阶梯中的步骤。为了保持合规性，干预主义者必须非常小心，不要过快地提高期望或将阶梯的下一步放得太高。记住：在孩子顺从当前阶梯步骤并且不显得焦虑或回避之前，切勿进入下一步。
CHAPTER 5
STEPS TOWARD BRAVERY (CLIMBING THE COMMUNICATION
LADDER)
第五章
走向掠夺的步伐（攀登沟通的阶梯）

Long ago, a wise person made the observation that it takes a village to raise a child. It also takes a village to help a child with selective mutism, and each person has ways of being helpful and supportive.
很久以前，一位有智慧的人发现需要一个村庄抚养孩子。它还需要一个村庄帮助一个有选择性缄默症的孩子，每个人都有自己的帮助和支持方式。

HOW KEYWORKERS CAN HELP
“Practice makes perfect” is not just a saying; it is a way of life for kids with selective mutism. Most have spent several years practicing avoidance, and those around them have practiced reinforcing the avoidance by answering for them, not asking questions, and allowing all responses to be nonverbal communication. If you practice anything enough, you become very good at it. Thus, we MUST frequently practice being brave. Direct intervention needs to happen for at least fifteen minutes, at least three times per week (this does not count the intervention being done by the parent or outside mental health practitioner). Frequency of practice being brave is needed to counteract the frequency with which the child has practiced avoiding in the past.
After a child is building successful practices with the keyworker, either via stimulus fading or shaping procedures, it is important to begin to generalize those skills outside of the closed-office setting (e.g., practicing the use of their “brave voice” in other settings and with other people). Many children can become verbal inside a closed-office setting (especially one that becomes associated with brave talking practices) but without specific practice do not naturally generalize that speech to other people and places within the school setting.
关键词如何帮助
“实践变得完美”不仅仅是一种说法;对于有选择性缄默症的孩子来说，这是一种生活方式。大多数人都花了几年时间来避免练习，而他们周围的人通过回答问题来强化避免，而不是提问，并允许所有的回答都是非语言交流。如果你练习足够的东西，你会变得非常擅长。因此，我们必须经常练习勇敢。直接干预至少需要十五分钟，每周至少三次（这不包括由父母或外部心理健康从业者进行的干预）。需要勇敢的练习频率来抵消孩子过去避免练习的频率。
在孩子与关键工作者建立成功的练习之后，无论是通过刺激褪色还是塑造程序，重要的是开始在封闭式办公室设置之外概括这些技能（例如，在其他设置中练习使用他们的“勇敢的声音”和其他人一起）。许多孩子可以在封闭的办公环境中变得口头上（尤其是与勇敢的谈话习惯相关的话语），但是如果没有具体的练习，就不能自然地将这种言论推广到学校环境中的其他人和地方。

In both the school and the clinic setting, children must work through a step-wise plan to generalize obtained speech. First, brave practices can be completed one-on-one with the keyworker, or in a small group consisting of the child, keyworker, and comfortable communication partner (e.g., parent, sibling, good friend, etc.). After consistent speech is obtained, the focus of brave practices shift to generalizing. When beginning to bring in new communication partners or practicing in new environments, it is important to change only one factor at a time—the person or the place. Changing too many factors quickly can cause a substantial increase in anxiety—one that is often not manageable for the child. Therefore, if the goal is for the child to speak to the teacher in the classroom, the first step may be for the keyworker to work with the child in the classroom while no one is present. After evoking speech in that new setting, the teacher could be faded in. Alternatively, the teacher could be first faded into the keyworker’s office, where the child is used to speaking, and then the child and teacher could fade back into the classroom setting while maintaining speech.
It is beneficial to allow the child to have some control over what environments and what people will be included in the brave practices. Generally, I ask the child to use their 1-5 scale to rate how hard it would be to talk to a list of different people and in different environments in the school, and then we begin with the easiest one. Be careful not to ask the child if they want to talk to someone new or talk somewhere new; most will say no. Instead, you could phrase the question in a forced choice format. “You are doing such a great job with your brave talking it’s time to bring in someone new to practice with. Would you like to practice with Ms. Porter, Mr. Rodriguez, or Ms. Bunch? Could you tell me how hard it would be to use your brave voice with each of them?”
在学校和诊所环境中，儿童必须通过逐步计划来概括所获得的演讲。首先，勇敢的实践可以与关键工作者一对一完成，或者在由儿童，关键工作者和舒适的沟通伙伴（例如，父母，兄弟姐妹，好朋友等）组成的小组中完成。在获得一致的演讲之后，勇敢实践的焦点转向推广。当开始引入新的沟通合作伙伴或在新环境中实践时，重要的是一次只改变一个因素 - 个人或地点。快速改变太多因素会导致焦虑的大幅增加 - 这种焦虑通常对孩子来说是无法控制的。因此，如果目标是让孩子在教室里与老师交谈，那么第一步可能是让关键工作者在课堂上与孩子一起工作，而没有人在场。在新的环境中唤起讲话之后，老师可能会褪色。或者，老师可能先被褪到主要工作的办公室，孩子习惯说话，然后孩子和老师可以重新回到教室环境中。保持言论。
允许孩子对勇敢的实践中的环境以及人们将包含哪些内容进行控制是有益的。一般来说，我要求孩子使用他们的1-5级量表来评价与不同人员和学校不同环境中的人员名单交流的难度，然后我们从最简单的一个开始。小心不要问孩子他们是否想与新人交谈或在新的地方说话;大多数人会说不。相反，您可以用强制选择格式表达问题。 “你勇敢地说这是一个非常出色的工作，是时候引进新人来练习。你想和Porter女士，Rodriguez先生或Bunch女士一起练习吗？你能告诉我用他们每个人的勇敢声音会有多难吗？“

It is important that the keyworker prepare the new communication partner for either the stimulus fading or shaping activity. An example stimulus fading sheet entitled “Fading Procedure,” as well as a handout entitled “What is a Communication Ladder?” can be found on page 120. When practicing with a new communication partner or in a new environment, stimulus fading can generally be used by slowly fading a new person in to the conversation/activity or fading the speech slowly to a different setting. However, at times the child may become overwhelmed or anxious, and stimulus fading may not be possible. Shaping can also be carried out with new communication partners or in new environments. For example, the keyworker may sit with the child and a new communication partner, and work slowly up the communication ladder as a group. First, this may include all individuals practicing gestures together, blowing air, and making sounds. Eventually the group can work up to single and multiple word responses. While at first this may consist mainly of the child responding to the keyworker in front of the new communication partner, it is important that the new communication partner also become an evoker of speech by asking the child to carry out the steps of the ladder (i.e., the new communication partner should take turns giving instructions with the keyworker). If this transfer of speech does not occur, the child may speak in front of the new communication partner but never to them, and may be unable to do any “brave work” at all when the keyworker is not present.
重要的是，关键工作者为刺激消退或塑形活动准备新的通信伙伴。标题为“衰落程序”的刺激衰落表以及题为“什么是通信阶梯？”的讲义可以在第120页找到。当与新的通信伙伴一起练习或在新环境中练习时，刺激衰落通常可以是用于慢慢淡化新人进入对话/活动或慢慢地将语音淡入不同的设置。然而，有时孩子可能会变得不知所措或焦虑，并且刺激消退可能是不可能的。也可以与新的通信伙伴或新环境进行整形。例如，关键工作者可以与孩子和新的通信伙伴坐在一起，并且作为一个群体慢慢地在通信阶梯上工作。首先，这可能包括所有人一起练习手势，吹空气和发出声音。最终，该小组可以处理单个和多个单词响应。虽然起初这可能主要包括孩子在新的沟通伙伴面前回应关键工作者，但重要的是新的沟通伙伴也要通过要求孩子执行阶梯的步骤（即，新的沟通合作伙伴应轮流向主要工作人员发出指示。如果没有发生这种转移，孩子可能会在新的通信伙伴面前说话，但从不对他们说话，并且当关键工作者不在时，可能根本无法做任何“勇敢的工作”。

Generalizing skills is incredibly important, since kids with selective mutism tend to be rigid and boundary-specific. Just because the child talks to the speech pathologist in her office does not mean that she/he will naturally generalize that speech to other settings, and so it must be practiced. Practice must be frequent and redundant. If a child does not see a communication partner for some time or does not regularly practice in an environment, regression can occur and the anxiety/fear surrounding that person or environment may spontaneously recur. If it does, it will be necessary to take a step back on the ladder, re-elicit speech, and then continue to practice regularly.
After a child is verbal with many people in the school setting, brave work with the keyworker could include activities that encourage the child to speak to many different people. For example, person bingo encourages speech with many individuals in a playful way. The child is given a “bingo card” which includes nine slots with common attributes or experiences, such as, “has been to Florida” or “owns a dog.” The child’s job is to read these attributes to different people to find “three in a row” for bingo (see page 122). The interview game encourages kids to ask several people different “favorites” questions (see page 123) in order to complete the board. Mission cards send children on independent chores that require speech, such as asking the child to deliver an envelope to the principal and letting him know that it needs to be mailed tomorrow (see page 124). Children could be given the responsibility to “interview” peers and adults in the school setting using a pre-determined list of interview questions. Having a sheet to read from and a paper/clipboard to hold in their hands also tends to reduce social anxiety.
推广技能非常重要，因为有选择性缄默的孩子往往是僵化的和边界特定的。仅仅因为孩子在她的办公室与言语病理学家交谈并不意味着她/他会自然地将该言论推广到其他场合，因此必须实践。实践必须经常和多余。如果孩子在一段时间内没有看到通信伙伴或者没有经常在环境中练习，则可能发生回归，并且围绕该人或环境的焦虑/恐惧可能会自发地复发。如果确实如此，则需要退一步，重新引发言语，然后继续定期练习。
在孩子与学校环境中的许多人口头交谈之后，与关键工作者的勇敢工作可以包括鼓励孩子与许多不同的人交谈的活动。例如，宾果游戏鼓励许多人以有趣的方式发表演讲。给孩子一张“宾果卡”，其中包括九个具有共同属性或经验的插槽，例如“已去过佛罗里达”或“拥有一只狗”。孩子的工作是将这些属性读给不同的人找“三连续“为宾果游戏（见第122页）。面试游戏鼓励孩子们向几个人询问不同的“收藏”问题（参见第123页）以完成董事会。任务卡将孩子送到需要发言的独立家务中，例如要求孩子向校长递送信封并让他知道明天需要邮寄（见第124页）。儿童可以负责使用预先确定的面试问题列表在学校环境中“采访”同龄人和成年人。有一张纸要读取，一张纸/剪贴板可以放在手中也可以减少社交焦虑。

It is also expected that successes in individualized practices by the keyworker will eventually translate to “pushing in” to the classroom setting (e.g., transition from seeing the child individually to seeing the child in a small group setting, and eventually to seeing the child in their typical classroom setting). Since the eventual goal is to help a child feel confident speaking in class to both teachers and students, the keyworker may need to practice in the classroom setting with the child, encouraging speech with other students in group activities, assisting the child in responding or initiating to the teacher, and supporting the child during oral presentations. This should only be practiced once the child is easily verbal with the keyworker in a oneon-one setting and probably only after the child has had a few successful practices one-on-one with the teacher and other peers. It is important that the keyworker take care to shape toward speech in the classroom, first starting with simpler tasks and progressing toward more difficult, anxiety-provoking speech (e.g., brave talking with the child in the corner of the classroom, then in the middle of the classroom, then in front of the class).
预计关键工作者在个性化实践中取得的成功最终将转化为“推入”课堂环境（例如，从单独看孩子过渡到在小组环境中看到孩子，最终看到孩子进入他们典型的课堂设置）。由于最终的目标是帮助孩子在教师和学生的课堂上自信，所以关键工作者可能需要在课堂上与孩子一起练习，鼓励其他学生在小组活动中讲话，协助孩子做出回应或启动给老师，并在口头陈述期间支持孩子。这应该只有在孩子容易与钥匙工作者在一对一的环境中进行口头训练时才能实施，并且可能只有在孩子与老师和其他同伴一对一地进行了一些成功的练习之后才能实施。重要的是，关键工作者要注意在课堂上讲话，首先从简单的任务开始，然后向更困难，发人焦虑的演讲发展（例如，在课堂角落与孩子勇敢交谈，然后在中间在课堂上，然后在课堂前）。
The highest point of the communication ladder is initiating. Whereas the eventual goal is spontaneous initiating, many children need scripted initiation or practiced initiation before they are able to spontaneously speak. For example, brave work at this level of progress may include:
• Mission cards
• Role play for an oral presentation
• Running stretches in gym class
• Presenting on a topic of interest or teaching peers a specific activity
• Initiating scripted statements to peers or teachers (see page 125)
沟通阶梯的最高点是启动。虽然最终的目标是自发启动，但许多孩子在能够自发地说话之前需要脚本启动或实践启动。例如，在这一进展水平上的勇敢工作可能包括：
•使命卡
•口头表达的角色扮演
•在健身课上跑步
•介绍感兴趣的主题或教授同行特定的活动
•向同伴或教师发起脚本语句（参见第125页）

Besides practicing in the school setting with the child and generalizing those new skills to new people and environments within the school, the keyworker’s other main job is communicating with the parent, teacher, and psychologist about progress. I encourage everyone working with the child to keep a journal of practices. Progress notes can be written (this is detailed and time-consuming) or a more general log could be kept in a three-ring binder for all interventionists (keyworker, psychologist, and parent) to keep track of progress. This communication may seem like busy work, but I have seen treatment succeed or fail based solely on the communication of the team. It is vital that all main team members (i.e., keyworker, mental health professional, and parent) know what the child is successful at and/or struggling with, and what activities each member is practicing with the child. An example log sheet and blank log sheet are included on page 126.
除了在学校环境中与孩子一起练习并将这些新技能推广到学校内的新人和环境之外，关键工作者的另一项主要工作是与家长，教师和心理学家就进步进行沟通。我鼓励每个与孩子一起工作的人都要记录实践。可以编写进度记录（这是详细且耗时的），或者可以在三环活页夹中保存更通用的日志，以便所有干预者（关键工作者，心理学家和家长）跟踪进度。这种沟通可能看起来很繁忙，但我已经看到治疗成功或失败仅仅基于团队的沟通。至关重要的是，所有主要团队成员（即，关键工作者，心理健康专业人员和家长）都应了解孩子在成功和/或挣扎中的成就，以及每个成员与孩子一起练习的活动。第126页中包含示例日志表和空白日志表。

HOW MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS CAN HELP
A clinical psychologist or mental health professional outside of the school is very beneficial in conducting public practices, consulting with the school, and helping to train and coach the parents on how to intervene with their children. In order to be successful, many kids need to role play the practices that they are about to take part in. Prior to conducting a public practice, be sure to do three things:
1. Have the child rate how hard they believe the practice will be (1 being very easy and 5 being very hard). 
2. Role play and practice with the child. For example, if we are going to order in a restaurant, I pretend to be the clerk so that they can practice what they will order. We may even look at a menu online before leaving the office so the child can practice the exact words they are going to use. If possible, I will almost develop a “script” for the child (an over-practiced, word-for-word sequence of expected behaviors and interventions). 
3. Come up with a Plan B. Everyone involved should know the contingency plan in case the chosen brave work is too hard. Some people believe that having a Plan B will encourage the child to avoid the planned interaction, but Plan B is not avoidance—it is simply a different or slightly easier option. I find that having a Plan B actually makes the child more relaxed. Just think: if you were going to do something really anxiety-provoking, wouldn’t you want a Plan B (and C, and D. . ...)?
精神卫生专业人员如何帮助
学校以外的临床心理学家或心理健康专业人员非常有利于进行公共实践，咨询学校，并帮助培训和指导父母如何干预他们的孩子。为了获得成功，许多孩子需要角色扮演他们即将参与的实践。在进行公共练习之前，一定要做三件事：
1.让孩子评价他们相信练习的难度（1很容易，5很难）。
2.与孩子一起角色扮演和练习。例如，如果我们打算在餐馆订购，我假装自己是职员，这样他们就可以练习他们会订购的东西。我们甚至可以在离开办公室之前在线查看菜单，这样孩子就可以练习他们将要使用的确切单词。如果可能的话，我几乎会为孩子开发一个“脚本”（一种过度实践，逐字逐句的预期行为和干预措施）。
3.制定计划B.如果所选择的勇敢工作太难，所涉及的每个人都应该知道应急计划。有些人认为制定B计划会鼓励孩子避免计划的互动，但B计划并不是避免 - 它只是一个不同或稍微容易的选择。我发现有一个B计划实际上让孩子更放松。试想一下：如果你要做一些非常令人焦虑的事情，你不想要一个B计划（以及C和D. ......）吗？

Some ideas for public practices include:
• Ordering at a restaurant. You may find that practices need to be done both at a fast food
restaurant where ordering is done at a counter, as well as at a restaurant where the waitress approaches the table.
• Home Depot scavenger hunt. For this task, I make a list of several items that children would not likely find on their own, and then help them ask employees where items are located.
• Bowling. Bowling offers the opportunity for the child to request how many games and players we want, relay shoe size, and even order a little snack at the food bar. This is also a great activity for a few children with selective mutism to do together, since they can practice talking to each other (i.e., saying things like, “it’s your turn” or “great job”).
• Target, Walmart, or a similar store setting. These locations provide many opportunities for brave speaking in one place. The security person at the front door, the optometrist, the fast food restaurant, the pharmacy, the jewelry counter, electronics department, the dressing room employee, and the floor staff are often willing to chat.
• Nursing homes. Children visit during lunch or dinner, and offer nursing home residents a choice of beverage at the dinner tables. Since many residents are hard of hearing, the children are naturally prompted to speak quite loudly.
• “Safety Town” or a similar program. Many cities or school districts offer programs which teach children safety skills. The location is set up to look like a house and children can go from room to room and try to spot the safety violations. Kids receive prizes for telling the group about all the unsafe things they observe. Some “Safety Town” programs practice fire safety, in which they pretend the house is on fire and when the fireman enters they yell, “I am over here.”
• Surveys. Children can make up surveys asking people about their experiences, preferences, etc. and inquire with several individuals in an office setting, at the park, or in the school. For younger children, these surveys can include pictures to prompt questions.
公共实践的一些想法包括：
•在餐厅订购。您可能会发现需要在快餐时进行练习
在柜台进行订购的餐厅，以及女服务员接近餐桌的餐厅。
•Home Depot清道夫狩猎。为了完成这项任务，我列出了孩子们不太可能自己找到的几个项目，然后帮助他们询问员工项目的位置。
•保龄球。保龄球让孩子有机会要求我们想要多少游戏和玩家，换鞋尺码，甚至在食物吧点一点零食。对于少数有选择性缄默的孩子来说，这也是一项很好的活动，因为他们可以练习相互交谈（即说“轮到你”或“出色的工作”）。
•Target，Walmart或类似的商店设置。这些地点在一个地方提供了许多勇敢的发言机会。前门的保安人员，验光师，快餐店，药房，珠宝柜台，电子部门，更衣室员工和地板工作人员通常都愿意聊天。
• 疗养院。儿童在午餐或晚餐时光顾，并在疗养院居民的餐桌上为您提供各种饮料。由于许多居民很难听，孩子们自然会被大声说话。
•“安全城”或类似计划。许多城市或学区提供教授儿童安全技能的课程。该位置看起来像一个房子，孩子们可以从一个房间到另一个房间，并试图发现安全违规行为。孩子们会收到奖品，告诉小组他们观察到的所有不安全的事情。一些“安全城”计划实行消防安全，他们假装房子着火，当消防员进来时他们喊道，“我在这里。”
• 调查。儿童可以进行调查，向人们询问他们的经历，喜好等，并在办公室，公园或学校与几个人进行交流。对于年龄较小的儿童，这些调查可以包括提示问题的图片。

Communication among all team members is essential. Therefore, the psychologist or outside mental health professional should set up a time for a monthly phone consult with each patient’s keyworker. These consults can be very helpful in keeping track of progress, as well as brainstorming ideas to assist in reaching goals (both in the clinic and in the school). These phone consults generally consist of four parts:
How has the child been progressing in the school setting? How has the child been progressing in the clinical setting? What are our long-term goals for the child? How can we modify or improve our current intervention to continue making progress toward these goals? What else should we be working on?
Clinical psychologists or other outside mental health professionals can also be helpful in fading in family members, family friends, or other individuals in the child’s life. For example, I recently worked with a little boy who had never spoken to his babysitter. She was kind enough to attend a few sessions, with the goal of gaining speech from him. In the first session, she simply watched through a one-way mirror to observe how I interacted with him and also to observe him talking (since she had rarely seen him speak). I spent the last few minutes training her on how to fade into the next session. In the next session, I engaged him in particularly fun activities that I knew would evoke consistent speech, and she slowly faded in to the interaction. By the end of the session I was able to leave the room while he maintained speech with the babysitter. I encouraged her to practice brave talking frequently during that week, in order to generalize the speech and reduce his anxiety through practice. By the third session we were able to simply trouble-shoot some difficulties they had experienced that week, and after the third session my patient consistently talked to his babysitter.
所有团队成员之间的沟通至关重要。因此，心理学家或外部心理健康专业人员应该设置每月电话咨询每位患者的关键工作者的时间。这些咨询可以非常有助于跟踪进度，以及集思广益的想法，以帮助实现目标（在诊所和学校）。这些电话咨询一般由四部分组成：
孩子在学校里的表现如何？孩子在临床环境中的表现如何？我们对孩子的长期目标是什么？我们如何修改或改进目前的干预措施，以继续朝着这些目标迈进？我们还应该做些什么呢？
临床心理学家或其他外部心理健康专业人员也可以帮助家庭成员，家人朋友或其他个人在孩子的生活中褪色。例如，我最近和一个从未和他的保姆说过话的小男孩一起工作过。她非常友好地参加了几次会议，目的是获得他的演讲。在第一次会议中，她只是通过单向镜子观察我是如何与他互动并观察他说话的（因为她很少见到他说话）。我花了最后几分钟培训她如何淡入下一届会议。在下一次会议中，我邀请他参加特别有趣的活动，我知道这些活动会引起一致的演讲，然后她慢慢淡入互动。到会议结束时，我可以离开房间，同时与保姆保持联系。我鼓励她在那一周经常练习勇敢的讲话，以便通过练习来概括演讲并减少他的焦虑。在第三次会议上，我们能够简单地解决他们在那一周遇到的一些困难，在第三次会议之后，我的病人一直与他的保姆谈话。

HOW PARENTS CAN HELP
One of the most important jobs of a parent is encouraging social interactions. These social interactions can be divided into three main groupings:
• Extracurricular activities
• Play dates
• Interactions with extended family and family friends
• Public brave practices
As a mother of three, I realize how busy life is, and how difficult it can be to find time for the social practices. However, similar to the need for consistency and frequency of practices in the school, parents should be looking for opportunities to practice in public.
I always recommend that my patients be in extracurricular activities, as these lead to both increased self-confidence and increased social interactions with peers. When choosing an extracurricular activity, parents can consider the child’s current comfort level and level of symptom severity.
Which most closely describes your child’s/student’s communication skills?
Level Three - These children can communicate verbally with peers and adults, although they frequently take some time to warm up. They can convey needs /wants, respond to yes/no or easy questions (at least a one-word response), and show very few physical symptoms of anxiety when placed in novel situations (e.g., sweating, freezing, poor eye contact, changes in breathing, etc.). They are willing to part from the parent to try new experiences or engage with new people. 
Level Two - These children can consistently communicate needs/wants, even if it is through nonverbal means such as nodding or shaking their heads. They communicate more readily with peers, and generally have at least one friend whom they speak to easily across many different environments. They are willing to separate from parents for at least a short period of time to engage in a new activity or with new people. However, they may freeze or remain nonverbal with unknown peers and adults.
Level One - These children show significant anxiety with new adults and peers alike. They either freeze, providing very little verbal or nonverbal communication, or they are unable to engage in new tasks and activities, clinging to the parent.
父母如何帮助
父母最重要的工作之一是鼓励社交互动。这些社交互动可以分为三个主要分组：
•课外活动
•播放日期
•与大家庭和家人朋友的互动
•公共勇敢的做法
作为三个孩子的母亲，我意识到生活是多么忙碌，为社会实践找时间是多么困难。然而，类似于学校实践的一致性和频率需求，家长应该寻找机会在公共场合练习。
我总是建议我的患者参加课外活动，因为这会增加自信心，增加与同龄人的社交互动。在选择课外活动时，父母可以考虑孩子目前的舒适程度和症状严重程度。
哪个最能描述您孩子/学生的沟通技巧？
第三级 - 这些孩子可以与同龄人和成年人口头沟通，尽管他们经常需要一些时间来热身。他们可以传达需求/需求，回答是/否或简单的问题（至少是一个单词的反应），并且当处于新的情况时（例如，出汗，冷冻，眼睛接触不良，变化）表现出很少的焦虑症状在呼吸等）。他们愿意与父母分手，尝试新的体验或与新人交往。
第二级 - 这些孩子可以持续地沟通需求/需求，即使是通过非语言方式，如点头或摇头。他们更容易与同伴沟通，并且通常至少有一个朋友可以在很多不同的环境中轻松交谈。他们愿意至少在短时间内与父母分开从事新活动或与新人交往。然而，他们可能会冻结或与未知的同龄人和成年人保持非语言。第一级 - 这些孩子对新成人和同龄人表现出极大的焦虑。他们要么冻结，要么提供非常少的口头或非言语交流，要么他们无法从事新的任务和活动，而是依赖父母。
If your child or student is a Level Three, they should be able to tolerate trying new activities, sports, or day camps, so long as they are given a “warm-up” period prior to the beginning of the activity. It is beneficial to meet with the coach or counselor individually before the activity begins, and to allow the child the time necessary to get comfortable and verbal with this individual. Furthermore, education and information should be provided to the camp, counselor, or coach, so they are aware of what SM is and how to best work with children with anxiety. Helpful information cards can be found at www.selectivemutism.org for purchase (business-size cards explaining SM and where to find more information). Examples of appropriate activities include swimming, gymnastics, soccer, girl scouts, dance, baseball, and boy scouts, among many others.
If your child is a Level Two, they likely can be successful in short extracurricular activities or summer activities (1-2 hours per session), particularly those that friends are attending. Group sports, summer classes on creative topics such as art or crafts, and social clubs such as Girl Scouts would be excellent opportunities to practice communicating with new peers and adults while being involved in fun activities. Education will certainly need to be provided for the adult(s) running the activity, and the child will need to be coached on nonverbal ways of communicating with adults and peers, such as nodding/shaking their head, pointing, or writing.
If your child/student is a Level One, it is likely that they would benefit from either participation in individual sports (e.g., swimming, running, horseback riding, etc.) or those activities and sports that do not require any communication and can easily include a parent. Parents should attempt to help the child feel comfortable at the beginning, then fade themselves out of the activity slowly, encouraging the child to engage in the activity independently.
如果您的孩子或学生处于第三级，他们应该能够容忍尝试新的活动，运动或日营，只要他们在活动开始前进行“预热”期。在活动开始之前与教练或辅导员单独会面是有益的，并且允许孩子有足够的时间与这个人一起舒适和口头。此外，应向营地，辅导员或教练提供教育和信息，以便他们了解SM是什么以及如何最好地与患有焦虑的儿童一起工作。有用的信息卡可以在www.selectivemutism.org上找到（购买商业大小的卡片以及在哪里可以找到更多信息）。适当活动的例子包括游泳，体操，足球，女童子军，舞蹈，棒球和童子军等。
如果您的孩子是第二级，他们可能会在短期课外活动或夏季活动（每次1-2小时）中取得成功，特别是那些朋友正在参加的活动。集体运动，关于艺术或手工艺等创意主题的暑期课程以及女童子军等社交俱乐部将是参与有趣活动的同时与新同龄人和成年人进行交流的绝佳机会。当然需要为参加活动的成年人提供教育，并且需要以非语言方式与成人和同伴交流，例如点头/摇头，指点或写作。
如果您的孩子/学生是第一级，他们可能会受益于参加个人运动（例如，游泳，跑步，骑马等）或那些不需要任何沟通并且可以轻松进行的活动和运动包括父母。父母应该尽力帮助孩子在开始时感到舒适，然后慢慢地将自己从活动中淡出，鼓励孩子独立参与活动。

Play dates can be rather difficult to schedule and plan. Nonetheless, play dates may be the most effective way of evoking speech with peers. Children with selective mutism often benefit from frequent play dates with “buddies” from their class. When choosing play date “buddies” from the classroom, teachers could provide suggestions of peers who would be good options. Teachers should look for peers who are slightly more advanced and can adapt to communication differences. The “buddy” should have the ability to be patient with the long latency to response that can occur in children with selective mutism. Finally, children who are not pushy and in the child’s personal space, but instead are conversationally self-sufficient are good matches. When a few possible matches are determined, pair the child with SM with the possible “buddy” in a few classroom interactions and see if they are a good match. Children with SM will generally “show” us if they mesh well with the other child.
Who could be possible good matches for a buddy? What characteristics do you see that make you believe they would be a good match?
游戏约会可能很难安排和计划。尽管如此，播放日期可能是引起同伴发言的最有效方式。有选择性缄默症的儿童经常受益于与班上“伙伴”的频繁游戏约会。当从课堂上选择游戏日期“好友”时，教师可以提供同行的建议。教师应该寻找稍微高级并能适应沟通差异的同龄人。 “伙伴”应该能够耐受具有选择性缄默症的儿童可能发生的长时间反应。最后，那些没有咄咄逼人并且在孩子的个人空间中，而是在会话上自给自足的孩子是很好的匹配。确定一些可能的匹配后，将孩子与SM配对，并在几个课堂互动中将可能的“伙伴”配对，看看他们是否匹配良好。患有SM的儿童如果与另一个孩子很好地融合，通常会“显示”我们。
谁可能成为好友的好匹配？您认为哪些特征会让您相信它们会是一个很好的匹配？

__________________________________ __________________________________ __________________________________ __________________________________ __________________________________ __________________________________
Once a few possible “buddies” are identified within the classroom, parents are strongly recommended to schedule play dates in their home. It is important that the “buddy” come to the home of the child with SM, as going to a new environment can inhibit communication. Some children do best when left alone to play with a peer, as comfort in their own home translates into comfort in speaking. Other children need more a more specific plan to elicit speech with friends. Generally, the intervention approach to play dates with a new child would include two main steps:
1. Parent initiates and leads interaction with child and buddy. These should be interactive play opportunities, such as arts and crafts, games that encourage speech, cooking, or pretend play (kitchen, store, stuffed animals, etc.). These could also include communicative temptations, since (especially for younger children) parents are necessary for obtaining snacks, drinks, and needed items for games/play. These are excellent opportunities to encourage speech instead of (as one parent appropriately put it) “playing the mime guessing game.” As much as possible, parents should prompt the child to be verbal with them in front of the peer if not directly to the peer. 
2. Once the child is verbal in the interaction (this may take some time, depending on the severity of the anxiety), the parent should slowly fade out of the interaction, first by excusing themselves for a short period of time (e.g., “I need to check on something in the oven”) and then for longer periods of time, providing that speech is maintained when parents leave.
一旦在课堂上识别出几个可能的“好友”，强烈建议家长在家中安排游戏日期。重要的是，“伙伴”带着SM到达孩子的家中，因为进入新的环境会阻碍沟通。有些孩子在独自一人与同伴一起玩时表现最好，因为在自己的家中安慰可以转化为说话的舒适感。其他孩子需要更多更具体的计划来与朋友进行演讲。一般来说，与新孩子一起玩日期的干预方法包括两个主要步骤：
1.家长发起并引导与孩子和好友的互动。这些应该是互动游戏机会，例如艺术和手工艺，鼓励演讲，烹饪或假装游戏的游戏（厨房，商店，填充动物等）。这些也可能包括交际诱惑，因为（特别是对于年幼的孩子）父母是获得小吃，饮料和游戏/游戏所需物品所必需的。这些是鼓励言语的绝佳机会，而不是（如同一位父母所说的那样）“玩哑剧猜谜游戏。”父母应该尽可能地促使孩子在同伴面前与他们口头相传，如果不是直接同行。
2.一旦孩子在交互中口头表达（这可能需要一些时间，取决于焦虑的严重程度），父母应该慢慢淡出交互，首先通过在短时间内自我释放（例如，“我需要检查烤箱中的某些东西，然后检查更长的时间，并在父母离开时保持讲话。

After the play date is over, it is important not to assume that speech will magically continue on from there with the buddy. The two children need to be paired as frequently as possible in the school setting, and parents need to consistently invite the buddy to play dates in their home (although the setting can change to places such as the park, pool, or school playground once comfort is established). It may be helpful to systematically plan the practice settings if possible. For example, parents hoping to transition speech from a play date into the school setting may use the following hierarchy:
在游戏约会结束后，重要的是不要假设与伙伴讲话会神奇地继续下去。这两个孩子需要在学校环境中尽可能频繁地配对，并且父母需要一直邀请好友在家中玩耍（虽然时可以改为公园，游泳池或学校操场等地方当两人间建立了舒适的相处关系）。如果可能，系统地规划练习设置可能会有所帮助。例如，希望将语音从播放日期转换为学校设置的父母可以使用以下层次结构：



Only through repeated exposures do most children with SM become consistent communicators. Data and progress can be kept using the play date sheet on page 121.
Parents also play an important role in practicing with extended family and family friends. Generally, this means identifying family members who can practice with the child in a one-on-one setting or in a small group, using either the communication ladder or stimulus fading procedure. The best family members or family friends to focus on first are those who see the child regularly and have availability/interest in helping the child become comfortable and verbal.
For example, an aunt who can take an hour a few times a week to stop by to play board games with the child and parent while working up the communication ladder may be a great choice as a new communication partner. Alternatively, a babysitter who could come a few minutes early or stay a few minutes late and focus only on the child with selective mutism might be an appropriate new partner. While holiday parties or family dinners offer many individuals who might be willing to help, they often do not offer privacy, extended one-on-one time, or consistency of practice, and thus may not be the best settings and times in which to acquire new communication partners.
只有通过反复接触，大多数SM患儿才能成为一致的传播者。可以使用第121页的播放日期表保留数据和进度。
父母在与大家庭和家庭朋友一起练习时也发挥着重要作用。通常，这意味着使用通信阶梯或刺激衰落程序识别可以在一对一环境中或在小组中与孩子一起练习的家庭成员。首先关注的最好的家庭成员或家庭朋友是那些经常看到孩子并且有可能/有兴趣帮助孩子变得舒适和口头的人。
例如，在通信阶梯上工作时，每周可以花一个小时几次停下来与孩子和父母一起玩棋盘游戏的阿姨可能是一个新的沟通伙伴。另外，一名保姆可能会提前几分钟或迟到几分钟而只关注有选择性缄默症的孩子可能是一个合适的新伙伴。虽然假日聚会或家庭聚餐提供许多可能愿意帮助的人，但他们通常不提供隐私，一对一延长或实践的一致性，因此可能不是最佳的设置和时间。新的沟通伙伴。

Public brave practices are very important in generalizing the child’s communication to more public, novel areas. In general, it is recommended to parents that when they are out in public, the child should be responsible for social interaction of some sort at each public location. Ideas for public practices are provided in the “What Psychologists Can Do to Help” section. Although the psychologist initiates generalizing speech to the public arena, parents should continue to practice these skills with their child once the psychologist has documented headway in public. Frequently, this takes the form of “planned practices” at first. When a child is initially beginning to use their brave voice in public, the practices may take time and planning. This practice doesn’t fit well into typical trips to restaurants and stores, which may be rushed, stressful, and involve distractions from siblings. Instead, planned practices are public trips with the intention and goal only of practicing being brave. For example, dad may take the child to a coffee shop alone, where he can allow the child the time and attention needed to calmly carry out the practice. Trips to the grocery store could be made with only the objective of asking where the toy section is and handing over money, not rushing to buy a cartload of food. As the child becomes more confident and consistent, practices can be carried out with less planning and more spontaneity. As a rule, the more frequent the public practice, the more quickly the child’s anxiety will be reduced.
Finally, parents must take great care not to accommodate the child’s anxiety. Accommodation can occur when parents change their behavior, responses, or expectations due to the child’s presentation of anxiety. Some common examples of accommodation include:
公共勇敢的做法对于将儿童与更多公共，新颖领域的沟通概括起来非常重要。一般来说，建议家长在公开场合时，孩子应该负责每个公共场所的某种社交互动。有关公共实践的想法在“心理学家可以做什么来帮助”一节中提供。虽然心理学家开始向公共场所推广演讲，但是一旦心理学家在公共场合取得了进展，父母就应该继续与孩子一起练习这些技能。通常，这首先采取“计划实践”的形式。当孩子最初开始在公共场合使用他们勇敢的声音时，这些做法可能需要时间和计划。这种做法不适合进入餐馆和商店的典型旅行，这可能是匆忙，压力，并且涉及兄弟姐妹的分心。相反，有计划的做法是公开旅行，其意图和目标只是练习勇敢。例如，爸爸可以将孩子单独带到咖啡店，在那里他可以让孩子有时间和注意力来平静地进行练习。到杂货店的旅行可以只是为了询问玩具部分在哪里并交钱，而不是急于购买一大堆食物。随着孩子变得更加自信和一致，可以用更少的计划和更自发的方式进行练习。通常，公共练习越频繁，孩子的焦虑就越快。
最后，父母必须非常小心，不要容忍孩子的焦虑。当父母因孩子表现出焦虑而改变他们的行为，反应或期望时，就会发生住宿。住宿的一些常见例子包括：

• Trying to convince the child that nothing bad will happen when they talk, and they don’t need to worry. This is problematic for a few reasons:
• When others try to convince us that we shouldn’t worry about something, it generally doesn’t help.
• There may be times when something undesirable does occur when the child speaks (e.g., others react with surprise)
• Speaking for the child or obtaining desired items for the child without expecting communication (this reduces any motivation for the child to speak)
• Pulling the child from extracurricular activities because they don’t speak or feel anxious about attending
• Accept and excuse behavioral issues (e.g., temper tantrums, outbursts, cheating, hitting, etc.) because of an assumption that the behavior is an extension of anxiety
• Allowing the child to see our anxious behaviors without modeling coping strategies
•试图说服孩子说话时不会发生任何不良事件，他们也不必担心。出于以下几个原因，这是有问题的：
•当其他人试图说服我们不要担心某些事情时，通常无济于事。
•有时孩子说话时会发生不良事件（例如，其他人会惊讶地反应）
•为孩子说话或为孩子获得所需物品而不期待沟通（这减少了孩子说话的动机）
•将孩子从课外活动中拉出来，因为他们不会说话或对参加感到焦虑
•接受并原谅行为问题（例如，脾气暴躁，爆发，作弊，打击等），因为假设行为是焦虑的延伸
•允许孩子在不对应对策略进行建模的情况下看到我们的焦虑行为
Many of the techniques that parents do in order to help lower their child’s anxiety inadvertently reinforces the anxiety. In fact, more family accommodation predicts more child anxiety and worse treatment outcomes. Children need to hear that anxiety is okay and even protective and helpful sometimes, but sometimes anxiety wears out its welcome. Children then need to be encouraged to push past their hesitations and practice being brave, even when they feel scared. Appropriate supportive statements from parents includes two parts: support/empathy for the child’s experience and encouragement to move forward:
“I understand that this seems scary, but I know how brave you are—you can do it.” “This is uncomfortable but not unbearable.” “Going to soccer practice is hard but you are going to do great even though you feel afraid.”
父母为帮助降低孩子的焦虑而做的许多技巧无意中加剧了焦虑。事实上，更多的家庭住宿预示着更多的儿童焦虑和更糟糕的治疗结果。孩子们需要听到焦虑是可以的，有时甚至是保护性的和有帮助的，但有时焦虑会受到欢迎。然后，需要鼓励孩子们过度犹豫，练习勇敢，即使他们感到害怕。父母的适当支持性声明包括两部分：支持/同情孩子的经历和鼓励前进：
“我明白这看起来很可怕，但我知道你有多勇敢 - 你可以做到。”“这很不舒服，但并不难以忍受。”“去练习足球很难，但即使你感到害怕，你也会做得很好“。

WHAT TEACHERS CAN DO TO HELP
The teacher plays an important role in helping any child feel comfortable, accepted, and genuinely liked in school. A child’s self-confidence can hinge on a teacher’s interactions. Teachers who do not understand the child’s lack of speech may purposely exclude them (often due to a fear of increasing the child’s anxiety) from classroom activities that involve speech, such as circle time. While it is generally too time-intensive for teachers to act as a keyworker, they play a vital role in the school experience of a child, and they should very quickly be integrated into the list of potential communication partners. As soon as a child is speaking to the keyworker, I typically recommend that the next person who is introduced either via stimulus fading or shaping is the teacher. However, even before that concerted effort to incorporate them begins, there are steps teachers can take to increase their interactions with the child.
Teachers should routinely encourage communication. Many teachers refrain from asking children with SM questions, because they sense it increases their anxiety. However, unless the child has an opportunity to respond, they will not develop the skills necessary to communicate with teachers. This should begin as soon as the school year is under way and rapport has been established. At that point, asking forced choice questions can provide the child with an opportunity to answer.
An important consideration when asking a question of a child with selective mutism is the ability to follow through in obtaining a response. Do not ask the question if you are not prepared to stay and obtain a response from the child, as asking a question without obtaining a response accidentally reinforces the avoidance (i.e., if the child avoids and is successful, this avoidance is more likely to be used in the future). If the child isn’t able to respond to a forced-choice question, for example, the teacher should move back down the communication ladder until he/she obtains a response. An example of reversing back on the communication ladder might include:
教师可以帮助 
教师在帮助任何孩子在学校感到舒适，接受和真正喜欢方面发挥着重要作用。孩子的自信可以取决于教师的互动。不了解孩子缺乏言语的教师可能故意将他们（通常是由于害怕增加孩子的焦虑）排除在涉及言语的课堂活动之外，例如圈时间。虽然教师充当关键工作者通常过于耗费时间，但他们在孩子的学校体验中起着至关重要的作用，他们应该很快被纳入潜在的沟通合作伙伴名单。一旦孩子与关键工作者交谈，我通常会建议通过刺激褪色或塑造引入的下一个人是老师。然而，即使在开始采取协调一致的努力之前，教师也可以采取措施增加与孩子的互动。
教师应经常鼓励沟通。许多教师不会向孩子提出SM问题，因为他们觉得这会增加他们的焦虑。但是，除非孩子有机会作出回应，否则他们不会发展与教师沟通所需的技能。这应该在学年开始并建立融洽关系后立即开始。在那时，提出强制选择问题可以为孩子提供回答的机会。
在询问有选择性缄默症的孩子的问题时，一个重要的考虑因素是能够在获得答案时坚持到底。如果您不准备留下并获得孩子的回复，请不要问这个问题，因为在没有获得回复的情况下提出问题意外地强化了回避（即，如果孩子避免并且成功，这种回避更可能是在将来使用）。例如，如果孩子无法回答强制选择问题，那么教师应该回到沟通阶梯，直到他/她获得答案。反转通信阶梯的示例可能包括：
Teacher: Billy, would you like pizza or a hamburger for lunch today? 
Billy: (Silence). 
Teacher: (After at least a 5-second wait) What do you think, Billy—pizza or hamburger? 
Billy: (No response). 
Teacher: Hmm. . . if you want a pizza you could say “p” and if you want a hamburger you could say “h”. 
Billy: h 
Teacher: Thanks for letting me know you want a hamburger。

老师：比利，你今天午饭要吃披萨还是汉堡包？
比利:(沉默）。
老师:(至少等了5秒钟之后）你怎么看，比利披萨或汉堡包？
比利:(没有回应）。
老师：嗯。 。 。如果你想要一个披萨，你可以说“p”，如果你想要一个汉堡，你可以说“h”。
比利：h
老师：谢谢你让我知道你想要一个汉堡包。

Recently, I had a conversation with a patient, a young boy in the third grade. He had progressed to speaking with peers and his keyworker inside the school setting, but had not spoken to his classroom teacher. We have a very good rapport, and so I felt comfortable asking him if he knew why he had not been able to speak to her yet. He replied, “She does not care if I talk; she always tells me to write my answer or shake my head yes or no.” The teacher wasn’t requesting a verbal response or phrasing her questions in forced-choice format, because she did not want to make him uncomfortable, but he perceived it as ambivalence about talking. While there should be no overt pressure to talk, teachers should comment at times about their happiness in hearing the child’s voice or thankfulness that the child responded to them with a gesture.
最近，我与一名患者，一名三年级的小男孩进行了对话。他在学校环境中与同龄人和他的主要工作人员进行了交谈，但没有和他的课堂老师说话。我们有很好的融洽关系，所以我很自在地问他是否知道为什么他还没能和她说话。他回答说：“她不在乎我是否说话;她总是告诉我写下我的答案或摇头是或否。“老师并没有要求口头答复，也没有用强制选择格式来表达她的问题，因为她不想让他感到不舒服，但他觉得这样。对谈话的矛盾心理。虽然不应该有明显的谈话压力，但教师应该有时评论他们听到孩子的声音或感谢孩子用手势回应他们的快乐。

A journal can be a wonderful incentive to begin communicating with the teacher. Teachers can write down funny or interesting questions or conversation starters, and the child can respond to them at home. After this back-and-forth communication is flowing well, the journal may be transferred to a videotaped communication—the teacher videotapes him or herself asking a funny question, and the child videotapes a response. At first the videotape is viewed by the teacher alone, and then the teacher and child view it together. Soon, the proximity of videotaping may be shaped, with the teacher videotaping in one room and the child responding in another private room within the school, slowly moving closer and closer during the tapings until both are in the same room together taping. Eventually, the taping is no longer occurring, and instead the teacher is asking a question and the child is responding to it.
日记可以成为开始与老师沟通的绝佳动力。教师可以写下有趣或有趣的问题或对话启动者，孩子可以在家里回复。在这种来回沟通顺利进行之后，期刊可能会被转移到录像通讯中 - 老师录像带他或她自己提出一个有趣的问题，而孩子录像带回应。起初录像带仅由教师查看，然后教师和孩子一起观看。很快，录像的接近可能会形成，老师在一个房间里录像，孩子在学校内的另一个私人房间里回应，在录音期间慢慢地越来越近，直到两个人在同一个房间里一起录音。最终，录音不再发生，而老师正在问一个问题而孩子正在回答它。

A similar intervention called video feed forward may prove to be effective. This self-modeling technique involves a current communication partner videotaping the child responding to simple questions, such as “favorites” questions or factual questions. Then, the teacher (or individual with whom the child does not yet communicate) videotapes himself asking these pre-determined questions. The tapes are edited to appear as if the child and novel adult are having a back-and-forth conversation. The child is asked to watch/listen to this edited tape twice a day for at least a week. After this practice period, the novel adult asks the child the same questions in a one-on-one interaction. Some research suggests that the child may speak to this person on the first trial and that behavior will generalize to other situations in which the child was previously mute (Blum, et al., 1998).
一种称为视频前馈的类似干预可能被证明是有效的。这种自我建模技术涉及当前的通信伙伴录像，让孩子回答简单的问题，例如“收藏”问题或事实问题。然后，老师（或与孩子尚未与之沟通的个人）录像带自己询问这些预先确定的问题。对录像带进行编辑，看起来好像孩子和小说成人正在进行来回交谈。要求孩子每天两次观看/收听此编辑过的录像带至少一周。在这个练习期之后，小说成人在一对一的互动中向孩子询问相同的问题。一些研究表明，孩子可能会在第一次试验中对这个人说话，这种行为会推广到孩子以前无声的其他情况（Blum，et al。，1998）。

Teachers can help encourage interactions with a child at any level of communication by engaging with them, playing or interacting with them in a non-threatening way, using them as a “classroom helper,” and encouraging them to communicate in nonverbal ways if necessary, such as through gestures, writing, or technology. It can be beneficial to seat a child with selective mutism next to “buddies”— children that the child already talks to, or is working on talking to, though play dates at home. A list of other possible classroom accommodations can be found in Chapter 7.
教师可以通过与他们交流，以非威胁的方式与他们玩耍或与他们互动，使用他们作为“教室帮助者”，并鼓励他们在必要时以非语言方式进行交流，帮助鼓励与任何交流级别的孩子进行交流。例如通过手势，写作或技术。将孩子选择性缄默主义放在“伙伴”旁边是有益的 - 孩子已经与孩子交谈，或者正在与之交谈，但在家里玩耍日期。第7章列出了其他可能的课堂安排。

IS INTENSIVE TREATMENT RIGHT FOR MY CHILD?
Recently, psychologists are noting the benefits of intensive intervention for children with selective mutism. There are many fundamental issues related to treating a child with SM in the typical psychology clinic setting. First, the clinic is not a school. . . which is the situation where the majority of the anxiety occurs. It is very difficult to help a child practice being brave enough to overcome their fear if the child is not in the environment in which the fear mainly occurs. Second, children with SM tend to have long warm-up periods, even with those people whom they see on a regular basis. It make take 15 minutes of a 45-minute session for the child to re-establish the current step on the communication ladder, and then the clinician only has a fraction of the session to make new progress up the ladder. Finally, as with many anxiety disorders, research and clinical practice suggest that elongated exposures to feared stimuli result in faster desensitization. Since evidence is clear that early intervention is of utmost importance (to short- circuit a more practiced pattern of avoidance), any time that can be saved is precious.
Consider this: a child may be able to progress five steps on the communication ladder in five weeks with the typical weekly one-hour sessions. Alternatively, with intensive intervention all five steps may be accomplished in five hours in one day. Of course we would all choose to intervene in one day. Clinical evidence (Kurtz, 2013) is demonstrating that intensive intervention not only shortens the overall tie of intervention required but also the hours of brave practices necessary.
对我的孩子用强化治疗合适吗？
最近，心理学家注意到对选择性缄默症儿童进行强化干预的好处。在典型的心理诊所环境中，有许多与治疗患有SM的儿童相关的基本问题。首先，诊所不是学校。 。 。这是大多数焦虑发生的情况。如果孩子不在恐惧主要发生的环境中，那么很难帮助孩子练习勇敢克服恐惧。其次，SM的孩子往往有很长的热身期，即使他们定期看到的人。在45分钟的课程中花费15分钟让孩子重新建立通信阶梯上的当前步骤，然后临床医生只有一小部分会话才能在阶梯上取得新进展。最后，与许多焦虑症一样，研究和临床实践表明，长时间暴露于恐惧刺激会导致更快的脱敏。由于有证据表明早期干预至关重要（短路更为实践的规避模式），任何可以挽救的时间都是宝贵的。
考虑一下：孩子可以在五周内通过通信阶梯进行五个步骤，典型的每周一小时课程。或者，通过强化干预，所有五个步骤可在一天内在五个小时内完成。当然，我们都会选择在一天内进行干预。临床证据（Kurtz，2013）证明，强化干预不仅缩短了所需干预的总体关系，而且缩短了必要的勇敢实践时间。

There are many different options for “intensive” intervention.
• Intensive treatment sessions in the psychologist’s office. This reduces warm-up time and allows for possibly faster progression toward speech. The child’s developmental ability to maintain energy/focus needs to be considered in determining the length of a session, and parent finances may be a consideration, as most insurance companies will not pay for more than “treatment as usual”—45-minute sessions once per week.
“密集”干预有许多不同的选择。
•心理学家办公室的强化治疗课程。这减少了预热时间并允许更快地向语音进展。在确定会话时间时，需要考虑孩子保持能量/焦点的发展能力，而父母的财务状况可能是一个考虑因素，因为大多数保险公司支付的费用不会超过“常规治疗”-45分钟的会议次数每个星期。

• Intensive treatment sessions in the school setting, conducted either by the keyworker or the psychologist. This reduces warm-up time, allows for likely faster progression toward speech, and may reduce the need for a long-term pull-out program (and the potential disruptions to the child’s schedule that individual intervention involves). The cons of intensive interventions in the school include disruptions to the child’s school schedule for a short period of time while the intensive intervention is occurring, as well as the complexity of scheduling the psychologist or keyworker to be available for several days in a row.
Intensive in-school intervention can occur over the span of one week, with approximately twenty hours of treatment within the school setting. The intervention utilizes stimulus fading and/or shaping, with the goal of increasing the number of communication partners and environments in which the child speaks. Additionally, school staff are trained in the behavioral intervention (so that appropriate treatment can continue after the week of intensive intervention, and an individualized accommodation plan is drafted.
Initial observations suggest that intensive in-school intervention may be more effective than weekly treatment as usual. Experts at Thriving Minds Behavioral Health offer intensive in- school interventions nationally and internationally. Visit www.selectivemutismtreatment.com for more information.
•在学校环境中进行强化治疗，由关键工作者或心理学家进行。这减少了预热时间，允许更快地进行语音，并且可以减少对长期拉出计划的需要（以及个体干预涉及的儿童时间表的潜在中断）。学校密集干预的缺点包括在密集干预发生时短时间内破坏孩子的学校时间表，以及安排心理学家或关键工作者连续几天安排的复杂性。
在一周的时间内进行强化校内干预，在学校环境中进行约20小时的治疗。干预利用刺激衰落和/或塑造，目标是增加孩子说话的通信伙伴和环境的数量。此外，学校工作人员接受过行为干预培训（以便在强化干预一周后继续进行适当的治疗，并起草个性化的住宿计划。
初步观察表明，强化校内干预可能比往常更有效。蓬勃发展的思想行为健康专家在国内和国际上提供强化的校内干预。有关更多信息，请访问www.selectivemutismtreatment.com。

• Intensive group treatment in a school-like setting. Summer camps are available nationally for children with selective mutism. The goal of these camps is to simulate a classroom setting and allow the child to practice their brave behaviors with support. Camps such as Confident Kids Camp© (www.confidentkidscamp.com) are organized to expose children to the anxiety-provoking situations of school, such as responding to the teacher’s questions, show-and-tell and oral presentations, and group projects. Each child is paired with their own “camp counselor”—a trained therapist who provides individualized support throughout the week. Camps provide a child with the ability to practice brave talking right before the start of a new school year, and research is demonstrating a large increase in speech during the week of camp and maintenance of those gains into the new school year. Camps provide intensive practice with no real disruption to the child’s schedule, and allow parents and children to meet other families also struggling with selective mutism.
Research has found that Confident Kids Camp is effective in increasing overall speech and that these gains carry over into the school setting following camp. Specifically, Confident Kids Camp leads to a significant decline in the symptoms of selective mutism, an increase in the use of phrases, sentences, and responses during the time of camp and a significant decline in anxiety during the week of camp (Schultz, 2014). Other nationwide camps with similar behaviorally-based curriculums are finding comparable gains.
•在类似学校的环境中进行强化团体治疗。全国范围内的夏令营适用于有选择性缄默症的儿童。这些营地的目标是模拟教室环境，让孩子在支持下练习勇敢的行为。组织自信儿童营©（www.confidentkidscamp.com）等营地，让孩子们了解学校中引起焦虑的情况，例如回答老师的问题，表达和讲述以及口头报告和小组项目。每个孩子都与自己的“营地辅导员”配对 - 训练有素的治疗师，他们在整个星期都提供个性化的支持。营地为孩子提供了在新学年开始之前练习勇敢谈话的能力，研究表明，在训练营期间，这些成绩进入新学年，大大增加了演讲。营地提供强化练习，不会对孩子的日程安排造成任何影响，并允许父母和孩子与其他也在选择性缄默症的家庭会面。

研究发现，自信儿童夏令营有效地提高了整体言论，并且这些收益会延续到训练营后的学校环境中。具体而言，自信儿童营导致选择性缄默症的症状显着下降，在训练营期间短语，句子和反应的使用增加，并且在训练营期间焦虑显着下降（Schultz，2014） 。其他拥有类似基于行为的课程的全国性营地正在寻找可比的收益。

CHAPTER 6
BARRIERS TO GREATNESS (HOW TO AVOID PITFALLS)
第六章
通向伟大的路障（如何避免陷阱）

WHAT IF THEY DON’T ANSWER?
This is the consistent question of parents, teachers, and everyone committed to helping a child with selective mutism. First, here are some tips to consider that might help increase the likelihood of obtaining a response.
1. Generally, it is easier for the child to speak to familiar people rather than unfamiliar people, particularly those with whom the child already has an established rapport. The exception to this rule is individuals who have become “contaminated.” Contaminated individuals could be people who have known the child for quite some time, but to whom the child has never spoken. The longer a child knows someone and does not talk to them, the greater the chance of contamination. This is likely because these people know the child as “the kid who does not talk,” and perhaps the child is very anxious about the response of that person when they do finally speak. For this reason, some children have less anxiety about speaking to novel people who don’t know them as these people have no preconceived notions and will not express surprise if they do talk. Contamination does not mean that the child will never speak to the individual, but it may be much more difficult to evoke speech. 
2. Women tend to be easier to talk to than men (this is not always true, but true in general). 
3. The smaller the audience, the easier it is for the child to speak. If the child freezes and is unable to respond, consider the size of their perceived “audience”—who is watching? Who might be able to overhear? You may need to move to a more private location or reduce the number of people in the environment if the child is unable to respond. 
4. Consider the type of response you are trying to evoke. Is it an open-ended response? Is it particularly emotionally-laden? Is it very personal? Does it require a great verbal demand from the child? Avoid thought-provoking or difficult questions—begin with general knowledge or concrete questions. The goal is to build the child’s comfort level with speaking, not challenge their knowledge. Often, the prompt to speak can be made easier simply by switching to a forced-choice question or asking a new question altogether. 
5. Is it possible that you did not provide the “correct” answer in your forced-choice question? If you asked a child, “What do you want for lunch—a sandwich or a hotdog?” and the child wants a hamburger, they may not respond. The choices may need to be altered to allow for other answers, such as, “What do you want for lunch—a sandwich, a hotdog, or something different?” 
6. Sustained and intense eye contact and attention can reduce the likelihood that kids respond or engage with others. Most people (even those with no social anxiety at all) can only maintain eye contact for around three seconds before it becomes uncomfortable, and children with selective mutism tend to become overwhelmed by sustained eye contact. Therefore, it is best to make minimal eye contact when playing, and perhaps sit next to the child instead of across from them in play. At times, even turning your back or turning to the side can help evoke more verbalizations, as it is an obvious way of taking direct attention off of the child. 
7. If the child believes that they are being tested or graded, they may be more inhibited or anxious.
如果他们没有回答办怎么？
这是父母，老师和每个致力于帮助孩子选择性缄默的一致问题。首先，这里有一些提示可能有助于提高获得响应的可能性。
1.一般来说，孩子更容易与熟悉的人交谈而不是陌生的人，特别是与孩子已经建立了良好关系的人。这个规则的例外是那些已经被“污染”的人。受污染的人可能是那些已经认识孩子很长一段时间但是孩子从未说过话的人。孩子认识某人并且不与他们交谈的时间越长，污染的可能性就越大。这很可能是因为这些人知道这个孩子是“不说话的孩子”，也许这个孩子在最后说话时对这个人的反应非常焦虑。出于这个原因，有些孩子对与不了解他们的小说者说话的焦虑程度较低，因为这些人没有先入为主的观念，如果他们说话就不会表达惊讶。污染并不意味着孩子永远不会与个人说话，但唤起言语可能要困难得多。
2.女性往往比男性更容易交谈（这并非总是如此，但总的来说是正确的）。
3.观众越小，孩子说话就越容易。如果孩子冻结并且无法回应，请考虑他们所感知的“观众”的大小 - 他们正在观看？谁可以偷听？如果孩子无法回复，您可能需要移动到更私密的位置或减少环境中的人数。
4.考虑您试图唤起的响应类型。这是一个开放式的回应吗？它特别情绪激动吗？这是非常个人化的吗？是否需要孩子的良好口头要求？避免发人深省或困难的问题 - 从一般知识或具体问题开始。目标是通过说话来建立孩子的舒适程度，而不是挑战他们的知识。通常，只需切换到强制选择问题或完全提出新问题，就可以简化说话的提示。
5.您是否有可能在强制选择问题中没有提供“正确”的答案？如果你问孩子，“你想吃什么午餐 - 三明治或热狗？”而孩子想要一个汉堡包，他们可能不会回应。可能需要改变选择以允许其他答案，例如，“你想要什么午餐 - 三明治，热狗或不同的东西？”

If you are taking care to make the situation as easy for the child as possible, but the child still has difficulty responding, there are several options:
• Wait 5 seconds and ask again. This should be the first step taken whenever a child does not respond.
• Ask differently. Change the way in which you ask the question by rephrasing your forced choice question or making the question easier.
• Reduce expectations. Take a step back on the communication ladder. For example, if you are asking a question that requires a one-word response, and the child is unable to answer, revert to sounds or sound combinations. If they are unable to make sounds, move back to mouthing or blowing air. Try to refrain from moving all the way back to nonverbal communication once a child is verbal, but obtaining nonverbal communication is better than total avoidance.
• Move to a different area or do a “sidebar.” If you feel that the child is reacting to their environment, it may be necessary to move to a quieter place or a place with fewer people around. If you feel that the child is struggling in speaking to a new person, a sidebar could be used. A sidebar simply means moving away from others for a moment, allowing the child to regain their composure, and practicing the question before returning to the original interaction. For example, if the child is practicing answering questions with the teacher but freezes, the keyworker could pull the child aside, give them a moment to calm down, and ask the question again privately. Once the child is able to answer the keyworker privately, both could return to the teacher, and the teacher could ask the child again. If the child is still unable to answer the teacher directly, answering the keyworker in front of the teacher may be a good step in shaping toward talking directly to the teacher.
Once the child is responding verbally to the teacher (or any other adult), the response chain should be followed.
如果您正在注意尽可能让孩子容易接受这种情况，但孩子仍然难以应对，有以下几种选择：
•等待5秒钟再次询问。这应该是孩子没有回应时采取的第一步。
•提出不同的问题通过改写您的强制选择问题或使问题更容易，改变您提出问题的方式。
•降低期望。退回沟通阶梯。例如，如果您提出的问题需要单字响应，且孩子无法应答，请恢复为声音或声音组合。如果他们无法发出声音，请回到嘴里或吹空气。一旦孩子口头表达，尽量避免一直回到非语言交流，但获得非语言交流比完全避免更好。
•移动到不同的区域或做“侧边栏”。如果您觉得孩子对环境做出反应，可能需要搬到更安静的地方或周围人少的地方。如果您觉得孩子在与新人交谈时苦苦挣扎，可以使用侧栏。侧边栏只是意味着离开他人片刻，让孩子恢复平静，并在回到原始互动之前练习问题。例如，如果孩子正在练习向老师回答问题但是冻结了，那么关键工作者可以将孩子拉到一边，给他们一点冷静，并私下再次提问。一旦孩子能够私下回答关键工作者，两人都可以回到老师那里，老师可以再次询问孩子。如果孩子仍然无法直接回答老师，在老师面前回答关键工作者可能是直接与老师交谈的一个很好的一步。
一旦孩子口头答复老师（或任何其他成年人），就应该遵循响应链。

Response Chaining for Selective Mutism
选择性缄默的反应链

HOW TO COMBAT “THE WHISPERER” (AND OTHER TRANSITIONAL SPEECH)
When children with selective mutism transition into speech after not speaking in public for some time, it is not uncommon for them to use a “transitional voice.” This can take many forms:
• Whispering
• “Baby talk” or an immature speech pattern
• Muffled or unintelligible speech
• Altered speech (e.g., strange accents, staccato speech, etc.)
These transitional voices are likely a protective coping strategy, allowing the child to begin speaking without others truly hearing their real voice. If possible, caregivers should try to ensure that these transitional speech patterns are not reinforced from the very beginning. It is especially important to avoid reinforcing a whispered response, because whispering tends to be maintained if accepted from the start. In order to reduce whispering, I typically ask children at the initial step of the intervention to use their real voice. For example, when transitioning from voiceless sounds to voiced sounds on the communication ladder, the sounds that are reinforced are real sounds—sounds that make the child’s larynx rumble. If the child is not using his or her larynx to make those sounds, they are not truly making voiced sounds. Generally, I recommend continuing at that step in the ladder until the sounds are voiced.
If a child is already whispering at the beginning of treatment, some techniques that have been helpful to increase volume are simple verbal prompts (“I couldn’t hear you—please use your real voice”), gestural prompts (cupping an ear), setting volume as the goal of the session (an app on iPhones® called “Decibel” provides a decibel feedback of the loudness of the child’s voice volume—a goal could be saying ten words at 50 decibels), playing fun games or activities that require a louder voice (“Talking Tom” apps on the iPad or iPhone are helpful for increasing speech, as they rarely mimic whispered sounds), or moving back down the ladder to voiced sounds again, perhaps even working on non-word voiced sounds such as environmental noises, throat clearing, coughing, laughing, or animal sounds. Alternatively, if the intervention is stimulus fading, fading should only occur when the child is using a regular voice. If the child is whispering or using altered speech, the parent should continue working, prompting, and reinforcing regular speech before a novel individual begins the fading procedure.
如何打击“掠夺者”（以及其他过渡性言论）
当有选择性缄默症的孩子在一段时间不公开演讲后转为演讲时，他们使用“过渡性声音”并不罕见。这可以采取多种形式：
•窃窃私语
•“宝贝谈话”或不成熟的演讲模式
•闷闷不乐或无法理解的言论
•改变语音（例如，奇怪的口音，断音等）
这些过渡性声音很可能是一种保护性的应对策略，允许孩子在没有其他人真正听到真实声音的情况下开始讲话。如果可能的话，护理人员应该尽力确保这些过渡性语音模式从一开始就不会得到加强。特别重要的是要避免强化低声响应，因为如果从一开始就接受，耳语往往会保持。为了减少窃窃私语，我通常会在干预的最初阶段让孩子们使用真实的声音。例如，当在通信阶梯上从无声声音转换为浊音时，加强的声音是真实的声音 - 使孩子的喉部发出隆隆声。如果孩子没有使用他或她的喉头发出这些声音，他们就不会真正发出浊音。一般来说，我建议继续在梯子的那一步，直到声音发出声音。
如果一个孩子在治疗开始时已经窃窃私语，一些有助于增加音量的技巧是简单的口头提示（“我听不到你 - 请用你的真实声音”），手势提示（拔耳朵），设置音量作为会话的目标（iPhones®上的一个名为“Decibel”的应用程序提供了孩子语音音量响度的分贝反馈 - 目标可能是说50分贝的十个单词），玩有趣的游戏或需要的活动更响亮的声音（iPad或iPhone上的“会说话的汤姆”应用程序有助于增加语音，因为它们很少模仿低声的声音），或者从梯子上移回到再次发出浊音，甚至可能处理非单词浊音如环境噪音，喉咙清理，咳嗽，大笑或动物的声音。或者，如果干预是刺激消退，则只有在孩子使用常规声音时才会出现褪色。如果孩子正在窃窃私语或使用改变后的言语，父母应该在新人开始褪色程序之前继续工作，提示并加强定期讲话。

Acting silly and humorous can help reduce the child’s anxiety and encourage speech. For example, Dr. Jacqueline Hood uses the game Hungry Hungry HipposTM to elicit louder speech (J. Hood, personal communication, February 26, 2014). First, a practical explanation should be given prior to moving into the exercise. “This is why this game is helpful—it can help us use a louder and stronger brave voice, and here’s a way to make it fun.”
Start by having the child come up with silly sentences that they either think of or write down, and the interventionist should create some of their own (e.g., “The flying penguin is wearing a polka-dot bathing suit”). The goal is to say the silly sentence while playing Hungry Hungry Hippos in a loud enough voice to be understood. First, the interventionist says the sentence in a soft voice, then the child’s job is to say, “Louder.” when they cannot hear, until the interventionist reaches a volume loud enough to be heard over the game. The child then repeats the silly sentence in a voice loud enough to hear. When the balls are eaten, play stops and the child must repeat the sentence in a “medium” voice (no Hippo eating sounds to hide behind) to be sure he/she “really heard.” Next, the child takes a turn to say one of their sentences while playing until he/she can be understood. When the child and interventionist are both using a loud and clear voice, other individuals can be faded slowly into the play (Hood, 2014).
There are times when accepting whispering may be the only way to start making progress. If as an interventionist you feel that the child is capable of increasing the amount of speech, but not yet the volume of speech, and you have tried increasing volume with only a reduction in the amount of speech as an outcome, whispering may have to be acceptable for a time. In my work with children who have SM, about 25% of those whom I have treated fall into this category. With these kids I may choose to set my first goal to increase speech and then later correct the volume of speech.
表现愚蠢和幽默可以帮助减少孩子的焦虑和鼓励言语。例如，Jacqueline Hood博士使用Hungry Hungry HipposTM游戏引发更响亮的演讲（J. Hood，个人通讯，2014年2月26日）。首先，在进入练习之前应该给出实际的解释。 “这就是为什么这款游戏很有用 - 它可以帮助我们使用更响亮，更强大的勇敢声音，这是一种让它变得有趣的方式。”
首先让孩子想出他们想到或写下的愚蠢句子，而干预主义者应该创造一些自己的句子（例如，“飞行的企鹅穿着波尔卡圆点泳衣”）。我们的目标是说出一个愚蠢的句子，同时以足够大的声音播放饥饿的河马，以便理解。首先，干预主义者用柔和的声音说句话，然后孩子的工作就是说，“大声说。”当他们听不到时，直到干预主义者达到足够大的音量才能在游戏中听到。然后，孩子以一种足以听到的声音重复这个愚蠢的句子。当球被吃掉时，比赛停止，孩子必须以“中等”的声音重复句子（没有河马吃声躲在后面），以确保他/她“真的听到了。”接下来，孩子轮流说他们的一个句子在玩，直到他/她可以被理解。当孩子和干预主义者都使用响亮而清晰的声音时，其他人可能会慢慢消失在戏剧中（Hood，2014）。
有时接受窃窃私语可能是开始取得进步的唯一途径。如果作为干预主义者，你觉得孩子能够增加言语量，但还没有增加言语量，并且你试图增加音量而只减少言语量作为结果，可能需要低声说话。一段时间可以接受。在我与患有SM的儿童的工作中，我所治疗的患者中约有25％属于这一类。有了这些孩子，我可以选择设定我的第一个目标，即增加语音，然后更正语音量。
WHAT IF THEY DON’T WANT TO TALK?
Nothing halts treatment like a child who does not want to talk. This lack of motivation to change occurs most frequently in older children and adolescents and less so in young children. I have worked with many kids who feel they cannot talk (hopelessness) or don’t know how to get started (lack of a good intervention), but these concerns are much easier to address because I (and now you.) know the interventions that work and can start them down the road to success.
However, some children don’t see the benefit of speaking; everything they want and need has been provided for them without the requirement of speech and without the perceived risk inherent in engaging in verbal behavior (e.g., evaluation, providing an incorrect response, being judged). When children are not actively participating in the intervention, we need to ask ourselves if they have any motivators to communicate verbally, or if nonverbal communication meets their every need. I recently heard a joke about a 6-year-old boy who never spoke to his mother. One day during breakfast, he broke his silence by saying, “This toast is burned.” His mother was stunned and asked why he had not spoken before. He paused, considering, and stated, “Well, because everything has been all right up until now.” We generally do not learn new skills or attempt difficult tasks unless there is a need to make change and that change is perceived as achievable.
如果他们不想谈话怎么办？
没有什么能像不想说话的孩子一样停止治疗。这种缺乏改变动机的情况最常见于年龄较大的儿童和青少年，幼儿则较少。我和很多孩子一起工作过，他们觉得自己无法说话（绝望）或者不知道如何开始（缺乏良好的干预），但这些问题更容易解决，因为我（现在你）知道这些干预措施这项工作可以让他们走上成功之路。
但是，有些孩子没有看到说话的好处;他们想要和需要的一切都是为他们提供的，不需要言语，也没有从事口头行为所固有的感知风险（例如，评估，提供不正确的反应，被评判）。当孩子没有积极参与干预时，我们需要问问自己，他们是否有任何动词，以及口头沟通，或非语言交流满足他们的每一个需要。我最近听到一个关于一个从未和母亲说过话的6岁男孩的笑话。在早餐的一天，他打破沉默，说：“这个烤面包被烧了。”他的母亲惊呆了，问他为什么以前没有说过话。他停顿了一下，考虑着说，“好吧，因为到目前为止一切都很好。”我们通常不会学习新技能或尝试艰难的任务，除非需要做出改变并且认为改变是可以实现的。

But what if the child voices an overt desire not to talk? At times, a psychological technique called motivational interviewing (Rollnick, 1995) can be helpful in increasing internal motivation to make change. Motivational interviewing is a therapeutic approach that aims to identify and later resolve the ambivalence children and adolescents feel about changing their behavior. Parents and/or adults with excellent rapport and open communication may be the best people to utilize this technique, since it does require higher level, back-and-forth conversation.
Change is not feasible if the child does not want to change. It is important that prior to attempting motivational interviewing techniques, you assess the child’s readiness to change and confidence in his or her ability to make this change. This can be assessed by a readiness ruler or a visual aid numbered 1-5 where the child can mark his or her current readiness to change.
但如果孩子表达了不说话的公开愿望呢？有时，一种称为动机访谈的心理技巧（Rollnick，1995）可能有助于增加内部动机以进行变革。动机访谈是一种治疗方法，旨在识别并解决儿童和青少年改变行为的矛盾心理。具有良好关系和开放式沟通的父母和/或成年人可能是使用此技术的最佳人选，因为它确实需要更高水平的来回交谈。
如果孩子不想改变，改变是不可行的。重要的是，在尝试动机面试技巧之前，您要评估孩子是否愿意改变并对自己做出这种改变的能力充满信心。这可以通过准备标尺或编号为1-5的视觉辅助装置来评估，其中儿童可以标记他或她目前准备改变。

When you think about getting braver and using your voice more at school and in public, are you not prepared to change, already changing or somewhere in the middle?
当你想到在学校和公共场合更勇敢地使用你的声音时，你是不是准备改变，已经改变或在中间的某个地方？





Readiness to change can also be assessed more subtly, through the recognition of “change talk.” The child may use statements that signify desire, ability, reasons, need or commitment to change. By recognizing the specific statements that signify these stages in the change process, you can tailor your techniques to where the child is in terms of his or her readiness to change.
通过承认“改变谈话”，也可以更加巧妙地评估改变的准备状态。孩子可以使用表示愿望，能力，理由，需要或改变承诺的陈述。通过识别表示变革过程中这些阶段的具体陈述，您可以根据孩子的准备变化来定制您的技巧。

Desire (I would like to, I wish) 
Ability (I think I could, I am able, I can) 
Reasons (I know I would feel better, I would be able to ___ ) 
Need (I should, I have to) 
Commitment 
(Low level: I hope to, I will try to, I plan to) 
(High level: I will, I am going to, I promise)

欲望（我想，我希望）
能力（我想我可以，我能，我可以）
原因（我知道我会感觉更好，我能够___）
需要（我应该，我必须）
承诺
（低级别：我希望，我会尝试，我计划）
（高级：我会，我会，我保证）

So how does one motivate a child with selective mutism to speak? The following are specific techniques that can be used to evoke “change talk.”
1. List of pros and cons (benefits/costs) for and against using their brave voice more in school and in public. 
2. Looking forward—the child thinks about his or her hopes for the future, how he or she would like things to be different, and what would be the best results he or she could imagine if the change is made. 
3. Exploring goals—highlight the difference between the child’s current situation and his or her ideal life. By pointing out this discrepancy, children are more likely to decide that they would like to move toward their ideal life by changing their behavior.
During this discussion, it is best to use open-ended questions, so the child is able to explore their reasoning in a more meaningful way than by answering a “yes/no” question. Open-ended questions may not be feasible in all cases depending on the child’s comfort in answering such questions, and is an additional reason that parents may make the best conversational partners for motivational interviewing. Another way to frame this discussion is to have the child in the position of arguing for change and against remaining the same. This can be especially helpful, because people are more likely to internalize and act upon their own reasoning. In short, the aim is not to inundate the child with all the reasons you think they should change but to guide them to this realization (Lynas, 2012).
那么，如何激励有选择性缄默的孩子说话？以下是可用于唤起“改变谈话”的具体技术。
1.在学校和公共场合更多地使用他们勇敢的声音的利弊列表（利益/成本）。
2.展望未来 - 孩子思考他或她对未来的希望，他或她希望事情如何与众不同，以及如果做出改变他或她可以想象的最佳结果。
3.探索目标 - 突出儿童当前状况与其理想生活之间的差异。通过指出这种差异，儿童更有可能通过改变他们的行为来决定他们想要走向理想的生活。
在讨论期间，最好使用开放式问题，这样孩子就能够以更有意义的方式探索他们的推理，而不是回答“是/否”问题。开放式问题可能在所有情况下都不可行，这取决于孩子在回答此类问题时的舒适度，并且是父母可以为激励性访谈建立最佳对话伙伴的另一个原因。构建这种讨论的另一种方式是让孩子处于争论变革的立场，而不是保持不变。这可能特别有用，因为人们更有可能内化并按照自己的推理行事。简而言之，我们的目标不是用你认为应该改变的所有原因来淹没孩子，而是引导他们实现这一目标（Lynas，2012）。

Some specific questions that could be included are:
1. Ask about the positive aspects of the problem behavior (e.g. maintaining the mutism in school
and in public).
• What are some of the good things about _______?
• Summarize the positives.
2. Ask about the negative aspects of the target behavior:
• Can you tell me about the downside?
• What are some things you are not so happy about?
• Summarize the negatives. 
3. Explore life goals and values. These goals will be the pivotal point against which cost and benefits are weighed.
• What sort of person would you like to be? What do you want to do when you grow up?
• If things worked out in the best possible way for you, what would you be doing a year from now?
• Use affirmations to support “positive” goals and values. 
4. Restate the dilemma or ambivalence and then ask for a decision.
• If the decision is positive, the next step is goal setting—Use SMART goals (specific, meaningful, assessable, realistic, timed)
• What will be your next step?
• What will you do in the next one or two days?
• On a scale of 1 to 10 what are the chances that you will do your next step? (anything under 7 and their goal may need to be more achievable) 
5. If there is no decision or the decision is to continue the behavior.
• If no decision, empathize with difficulty of ambivalence.
• Ask if there is something else which would help them make a decision.
• Ask if they have a plan to manage not making a decision.
• If the decision is to continue the behavior, go back to explore the ambivalence. *Adapted from the work of Rollnick, 1995.

可以包括的一些具体问题是：
1.询问问题行为的积极方面（例如在学校维持缄默
并在公共场合）。
•_______有哪些好处？
•总结积极因素。
2.询问目标行为的消极方面：
•你能告诉我有什么缺点吗？
•你有什么不高兴的事情？
•总结否定因素。
3.探索人生目标和价值观。这些目标将成为衡量成本和收益的关键点。
•你想成为什么样的人？你长大后想做什么？
•如果事情以最好的方式解决了，那么从现在开始一年你会做什么？
•使用肯定来支持“积极”的目标和价值观。
4.重申困境或矛盾心理，然后要求做出决定。
•如果决策是肯定的，则下一步是目标设定 - 使用SMART目标（具体，有意义，可评估，现实，定时）
•您的下一步是什么？
•接下来的一两天你会做什么？
•在1到10的等级上，您下一步的机会是多少？ （任何低于7的东西，他们的目标可能需要更加可实现）
5.如果没有决定或决定继续行为。
•如果没有决定，请同情困难。
•询问是否还有其他可以帮助他们做出决定的事情。
•询问他们是否有计划管理不作出决定。
•如果决定继续行为，请回过头来探讨矛盾心理。 *改编自1995年Rollnick的作品。

Throughout the discussion, it is important to underscore the child’s strengths, particularly when they are discouraged by previously failed attempts to change. It is also important to convey that you understand what the child is saying by reflecting their statements. In fact, reflections allow the parent to further emphasize the negatives of remaining the same and the positives of changing. As noted in the PRIDE skills section, reflections are a restatement of information the child communicates. Below are examples of reflections:
在整个讨论过程中，重要的是强调孩子的优势，特别是当他们因以前失败的改变尝试而气馁时。同样重要的是通过反映他们的陈述来表达您对孩子所说的内容的理解。事实上，反思允许父母进一步强调保持不变的负面因素和改变的积极因素。正如PRIDE技能部分所述，反思是对孩子沟通的信息的重述。以下是反思的例子：

Child statement:	 “I am scared that if I talk, everyone will look at me.” 
Reflection:	 “You are interested in talking, but worry that if you do, people might look at you.” 
Child statement: 	“I guess talking would make school easier, because I could ask the teacher questions.” 
Reflection: 	“So there are positives to talking at school that would make school a lot easier, like asking the teacher questions if you don’t understand.”
儿童声明：	“我很害怕，如果我说话，每个人都会看着我。”
反思：	“你有兴趣说话，但担心如果你这样做，人们可能会看着你。”
儿童声明：	“我想说话会让学校变得更容易，因为我可以向老师提问。”
反思：	“因此，在学校谈论可以使学校变得更容易，例如在你不理解的情况下向老师提问。”

FACING RESISTANCE
Change can be a scary process. Despite the negative outcomes associated with current behavior, staying in one’s old ways can be more comfortable than changing. Therefore, throughout the discussion the child might express various types of resistance to the process. This might include arguing and other forms of avoidance of change, like interrupting, inattention, side-tracking, etc. In motivational interviewing, resistance is not directly addressed. Instead, acknowledge the emotion the child is presenting. Tie this into a statement about their ambivalence. For example, you might say something like: “So you said you want to talk more at school, but it also seems like you are worried that other people will take special notice of you if you talk, and you don’t want that to happen.” Simpler reflections can also be used to clarify that you are on the same page as the child, that you understand their reluctance. This will likely improve the rapport with the child—everyone prefers feeling understood, including children and adolescents.

面对抗拒
改变可能是一个可怕的过程。尽管与当前行为相关的负面结果，保持一个人的旧方式可能比改变更舒服。因此，在整个讨论中，儿童可能表达对该过程的各种类型的抵抗。这可能包括争论和其他避免变革的形式，如打断，注意力不集中，侧面跟踪等。在激励面试中，抵制并未直接解决。相反，承认孩子所呈现的情感。将此与关于其矛盾心理的陈述联系起来。例如，你可能会这样说：“所以你说你想在学校多说话，但你似乎也担心如果你说话，其他人会特别注意到你，你不希望这样“简单的反思也可以用来澄清你和孩子在同一页上，你明白他们不情愿。这可能会改善与孩子的关系 - 每个人都更喜欢被理解，包括儿童和青少年。

SELECTIVE MUTISM “DON’TS”
Many school staff, professionals, and parents try to intervene effectively and yet make mistakes along the way (as do I—we are human). This book has provided many ideas or actions that interventionists and parents “should” do to assist a child with selective mutism, but it is always good to know exactly what NOT to do.
Here is a “Don’ts” cheat sheet to help.
• Don’t provide too many escape routes or avoidance techniques for kids. While we cannot hurry
them along too much, we also don’t want to provide too many crutches. Teaching sign language, using assistive technology, or only asking questions that allow a nonverbal response may reduce the motivation to speak—why would the child talk if they can convey every want, need, and thought nonverbally? We must take care to begin to reduce our rescuing and instead begin encouraging the child to use verbalizations to get needs met. That is not to say that the expectation should immediately be that the child must verbalize to obtain what they want, but that eventually ‘talking gets the good stuff’ and we become much less responsive to nonverbal communication.
• Don’t accidentally reinforce. Reinforcement should be given for the current step on the ladder and ones higher, and at some point nonverbal responses should no longer be accepted or rewarded. For example, if I take a child to order a cookie at a coffee shop, and despite all of our practice and planning, they just simply are not able to order, do I order the cookie for them? No. It breaks my heart a little to walk out of that store with no cookie, but I convey to them, “I know you worked really hard, and we will try again next time.”
• Don’t mind-read. Most of us have become quite good at knowing what the child with selective mutism wants before they even indicate it. For example, I recently discovered that the mother of a teenage patient with SM knew what her daughter wanted from all of her favorite restaurants, and automatically ordered for her without even asking the daughter or suggesting the daughter play a role in ordering her own food. I joke in workshops by saying that I become very “dumb” when I work with kids with selective mutism. I suddenly forget and cannot understand what they want unless they say it, and cannot hear well unless they speak up. Kids need for us to begin reducing our automatic knowledge of what they want, and begin asking them to take responsibility for indicating, even nonverbally, their choices, needs, and desires.
选择性缄默症的“不要”
许多学校的工作人员，专业人士和家长都试图有效地进行干预，但在此过程中却犯了错误（就像我 - 我们是人类一样）。这本书提供了干预主义者和父母“应该”做的许多想法或行动，以帮助有选择性缄默的孩子，但确切地知道不该做什么总是好的。
这是一个“不应该”的备忘单来帮助记住。
•不要为孩子提供太多的逃生路线或避让技术。虽然我们不能着急
他们太过分了，我们也不想提供太多的拐杖。教授手语，使用辅助技术，或只提出允许非言语反应的问题可能会降低说话的动机 - 如果孩子能够传达非语言的每一个想要，需要和想法，孩子为什么会说话？我们必须注意开始减少我们的救援，而是开始鼓励孩子使用语言表达来满足需求。这并不是说，期望应该立刻就是孩子必须用语言表达才能获得他们想要的东西，但最终“说话会得到好东西”，而我们对非语言交流的反应也会减少。
•不要意外加强。应该对梯子上的当前步骤和更高的步骤进行加强，并且在某些时候不应再接受或奖励非语言反应。例如，如果我带孩子在咖啡店订购饼干，尽管我们进行了所有的练习和计划，但他们根本无法订购，我是否为他们订购了饼干？没有。在没有饼干的情况下离开那家商店我心碎了一点，但我告诉他们，“我知道你工作很努力，下次我们会再试一次。”
•不要介意。我们大多数人都非常擅长知道选择性缄默症的孩子在表达之前想要什么。例如，我最近发现一位患有SM的青少年患者的母亲知道她女儿想要从她最喜欢的所有餐馆得到什么，并且自动为她订购，甚至没有询问女儿或建议女儿在订购自己的食物时发挥作用。我在研讨会上开玩笑说，当我与有选择性缄默的孩子一起工作时，我变得非常“愚蠢”。我突然忘记了，除非他们说出来，否则无法理解他们想要什么，除非他们说出来，否则听不清楚。孩子们需要我们开始减少我们对他们想要的东西的自动知识，并开始要求他们负责指示，甚至是非语言，他们的选择，需求和愿望。

• Take great care not to be critical or discouraging. I realize that working with these children is
sometimes frustrating, discouraging, and slow. However, critical comments to or about them will not help. These children do not “just need a good spanking.” Trying to force them to talk will not work. Do not do it.
• Don’t allow the child to see your anxiety or frustration. While both of those emotions are normal when working with children with selective mutism, they are in no way helpful to the child. Keep them to yourself. This is not about our goals and where we think they should be—it is about their goals and their progress.
• When shaping using a communication ladder, be very careful about jumping steps on the ladder. There is a reason that slow, steady progression works — because it is within the ability level of the child and does not elevate them to an unmanageable level of anxiety. If you jump steps, you may place them in a position of being unable to perform. If in doubt, always go slow or move back one step on the ladder.
• Don’t get greedy. We are all encouraged by seeing a child’s progress, and we often want to promote and maintain that progress as much as possible. Therefore, we sometimes ask kids to push themselves farther and faster than previously agreed upon. If I had agreed with a child that we were going to play one game of Person Bingo, I should offer to end the game after one round regardless of how the child is doing. If the child wants to continue the game, great. If I request that they continue playing longer than previously agreed upon, I become unpredictable and untrustworthy in their eyes.
•小心谨慎，不要批评或沮丧。我意识到与这些孩子一起工作是
有时令人沮丧，沮丧和缓慢。但是，对它们或对它们的批评意见无济于事。这些孩子并不“只需要一个好的打屁股。”试图强迫他们说话是行不通的。不要做。
•不要让孩子看到你的焦虑或沮丧。虽然与选择性缄默症的孩子一起工作时这两种情绪都是正常的，但它们对孩子没有任何帮助。把它们留给自己。这不是关于我们的目标，也不是我们认为的目标 - 关于他们的目标和进展。
•使用通信梯子进行整形时，要非常小心在梯子上跳跃步骤。有一个原因是缓慢，稳定的进展起作用 - 因为它在儿童的能力水平之内，并没有将他们提升到难以控制的焦虑水平。如果您跳过步骤，可能会将它们置于无法执行的位置。如果有疑问，请始终走慢或在梯子上退一步。
•不要贪心。看到孩子的进步，我们都感到鼓舞，我们经常希望尽可能地促进和保持这种进步。因此，我们有时会要求孩子们比以前达成的协议更快更快地推动自己。如果我同意一个孩子我们打算玩一个人宾果游戏，我应该提议在一轮之后结束游戏，无论孩子如何做。如果孩子想要继续比赛，那太好了。如果我要求他们继续比以前达成的协议更长时间播放，我会在他们的眼中变得不可预测和不值得信任。

• Don’t say, “Don’t worry—no one will hear you.” At times, I am working with children in my office, and the children are obviously concerned about someone overhearing them speak (i.e., they are glancing around, lowering their voices, and moving closer to me). I know that the others in the office are not listening, and probably could not overhear them even if they were listening, but I must not convey that to the child. The entire goal of the treatment is to desensitize them to people hearing their voices, so these statements are not helpful. Telling them not to worry because that specific person will not hear them communicates the same message as if I told a child who was afraid of dogs, “Don’t worry—that one will not bite you.” The underlying message? This one might not bite, but the next one could.
• Not practicing brave talking enough leads directly to. . . not brave talking enough. The child must practice frequently and repeatedly to be successful and for those gains to be maintained. We would not expect for a child to learn to read a word with one presentation and no continued practice. Practice must be maintained and consistent.
• Don’t set the bar too high. As adults, we tend to want quick change, quick turnaround, and quick outcomes. However, we must work at the child’s speed and comfort level. If you had a fear and were trying hard to face it, I am certain you would want others supporting you, standing beside you and cheering you on, not nagging at you to “hurry up and get over it” (the underlying message when we are asking a child to change quickly). Desensitization takes time and patience.
• Don’t ask open-ended questions. These are typically difficult for children with SM to answer. Instead, try to phrase questions as forced-choice.
• Don’t bombard them with questions. At times, parents can get nervous and embarrassed, and react to that anxiety by asking dozens of questions in rapid-fire succession. Ask a question, provide a pause for the child to respond (at least 5 seconds.) and if they don’t respond ask the same question again or rephrase the same question.
•不要说，“别担心 - 没有人会听到你的声音。”有时候，我在办公室与孩子们一起工作，孩子们显然担心有人听到他们说话（也就是说，他们正在四处看看，降低他们的声音，并靠近我）。我知道办公室里的其他人都没有听，即使他们在听，也可能无法听到他们的声音，但我不能把它传达给孩子。治疗的整个目标是使他们对听到他们的声音的人不敏感，所以这些陈述没有帮助。告诉他们不要担心，因为那个特定的人不会听到他们传达同样的信息，好像我告诉一个害怕狗的孩子，“别担心 - 一个人不会咬你。”潜在的信息？这个可能不会咬，但下一个可能。
•不练习勇敢的说话直接导致。 。 。不够勇敢的说话。孩子必须经常反复练习才能获得成功，并保持这些成果。我们不希望孩子学会用一个演示文稿来阅读一个单词，而不是继续练习。必须保持实践并保持一致。
•请勿将杆设置得太高。作为成年人，我们倾向于快速变化，快速周转和快速结果。但是，我们必须以孩子的速度和舒适程度工作。如果你有一种恐惧，并且正在努力面对它，我相信你会希望别人支持你，站在你旁边为你欢呼，不要唠叨你“快点过来”（我们的基本信息）要求孩子迅速改变）。脱敏需要时间和耐心。
•不要问开放式问题。 SM的孩子通常很难回答这些问题。相反，尝试将问题短语强制选择。
•不要用问题轰炸它们。有时，父母会感到紧张和尴尬，并且
通过在快速连续中提出数十个问题来应对这种焦虑。提出一个问题，为孩子提供一个暂停的响应（至少5秒钟），如果他们没有回应，请再次提出相同的问题或重新提出相同的问题。

• Don’t focus on polite words. . . yet. Many parents complain that the hardest words for their children to say are polite words such as “sorry,” “thank you,” “please,” and “excuse me.” Research has not found an answer for this phenomenon yet, but it is possible that children have “over- practiced” avoiding these words. Parents have attempted over and over to encourage their child to say “please” or “thank you” in public, and the child has therefore garnered a lot of practice avoiding saying these phrases. In the beginning of treatment, I ask parents not to prompt their child to greet me in the waiting room, say goodbye to me after the appointment, or thank me after receiving their toy. We will work on these phrases later and, until we do, prompting them generally only sets us up for failure.
• Don’t worry about having your child use proper names when speaking to friends and family. Another interesting anomaly about children with selective mutism is that they are often hesitant or even unable/unwilling to use proper names, even if they know the names well. Again, this is something that can be the focus later in the intervention, but should be put aside at the start.
• Don’t make a lot of eye contact. As noted before, this can increase anxiety. Generally, as the child becomes more comfortable with you and others eye contact naturally follows.
• Don’t let your anxiety get in the way. It is okay for a child to struggle a little, and it has to be okay for them to be a little uncomfortable. As noted before, individual growth does not come as a result of doing only things that are easy and comfortable. Try to manage your own anxiety privately.
•不要专注于礼貌用语。 。 。然而。许多家长抱怨说孩子最难说的是“抱歉”，“谢谢你”，“请”，“请原谅我”这样的礼貌用语。研究还没有找到这个现象的答案，但它是可能是孩子们“过度练习”避免这些话。父母一遍又一遍地试图鼓励他们的孩子在公共场合说“请”或“谢谢”，因此孩子因为避免说这些短语而获得了很多练习。在治疗开始时，我要求家长不要让他们的孩子在候诊室迎接我，在预约后跟我说再见，或者在收到他们的玩具后感谢我。我们将在稍后处理这些短语，直到我们这样做，提示它们通常只会让我们失败。
•在与朋友和家人交谈时，不要担心让您的孩子使用正确的名字。关于选择性缄默症儿童的另一个有趣的异常现象是，他们经常犹豫不决，甚至不愿意/不愿意使用专有名称，即使他们很清楚这些名字。同样，这可以成为干预后期关注的焦点，但应该在开始时放在一边。
•不要进行大量的目光接触。如前所述，这会增加焦虑。一般来说，随着孩子对你和其他人的关注变得更加自然，眼神接触会随之而来
•不要让你的焦虑妨碍。孩子挣扎一点也没关系，他们有点不舒服。如前所述，个人成长并不是因为只做了容易和舒适的事情。试着私下管理自己的焦虑。


COACHING OTHERS TO BE HELPFUL
• It is the holiday season, and dreaded Aunt Nancy is going to be at the family Christmas party. Not only does she not help Isaac speak, but her behavior actually makes Isaac’s anxiety worse. Every year it is the same interaction—she runs up to Isaac, asks him several questions in front of a big group of family members, and asks Isaac’s parents why he will not talk.
• Ben is a child in a large extended family. Family members consistently tell Ben’s parents that he will grow out of his silence, and that there is no reason to work on it because nothing is really wrong with him. Family members tend to either ignore him or just ask him yes/no questions, and don’t seem concerned that he does not talk to them.
• The coach at soccer practice alerts Baylee’s parents that she needs to start talking or she will be thrown off the team. After all, she probably just needs a stern talk and some consequences.
Do any of these examples sound like your child, or the child you are working with? The first step is educating others on selective mutism; many people act inappropriately because they simply do not understand. Encourage others in the child’s life to be accepting, warm, and caring toward the child. Mutism is not a behavior that the child chose, nor is it born of oppositionality. Providing a caring, accepting, and nurturing environment is of upmost importance. Ask other adults to allow the child warm- up time without questions or a lot of direct speech. Encourage the adults to play with them, smile at them, and have fun with them. Buy books on selective mutism and loan them out to teachers, grandparents, and soccer coaches. Request close family and friends consider meeting one-on-one with the child using a communication ladder or stimulus fading procedure to increase speech (with the help and training of either a knowledgeable parent or a mental health professional). A handout that could be given to the adults in the child’s life is provided on page 128. Write up a small letter about your child, the wonderful strengths that he or she exhibits, and the best ways to interact with them. An example letter might include:
教练其他人提供帮助
•这是假日季节，可怕的南希姨妈将参加家庭圣诞派对。她不仅没有帮助艾萨克说话，而且她的行为实际上让艾萨克的焦虑更加严重。每年都是同样的互动 - 她跑到艾萨克，在一大群家庭成员面前问他几个问题，并询问艾萨克的父母为什么不会说话。
•Ben是一个大家庭中的孩子。家人一直告诉Ben的父母，他将从沉默中成长，并且没有理由继续努力，因为他没有任何问题。家庭成员往往要么忽视他，要么只是问他是/否问题，并且似乎并不担心他不与他们交谈。
•足球训练教练警告Baylee的父母，她需要开始说话，否则她将被抛弃。毕竟，她可能只需要严厉的谈话和一些后果。
这些例子中的任何一个听起来都像您的孩子，或您正在与之共处的孩子吗？第一步是教育其他人选择性缄默;许多人表现得不恰当，因为他们根本不理解。鼓励孩子的生活中的其他人接受，温暖和关心孩子。缄默不是孩子选择的行为，也不是出生于对立。提供关怀，接受和培育环境至关重要。要求其他成年人在没有问题或大量直接讲话的情况下允许孩子的热身时间。鼓励成年人与他们一起玩耍，对他们微笑，并与他们玩耍。购买有选择性缄默的书籍，并将它们借给老师，祖父母和足球教练。要求亲密的家人和朋友考虑与孩子一对一地使用沟通阶梯或刺激褪色程序来增加言语（在知识渊博的父母或心理健康专业人员的帮助和培训下）。第128页提供了可以给予孩子生命中成年人的讲义。写一封关于您孩子的小写信，他或她展示的优秀力量，以及与他们互动的最佳方式。示例信函可能包括：

Dear Family and Friends,
You may have noticed that it is difficult for __________ to speak to you, and sometimes even for him/her to respond to you at all. ___________ has an anxiety disorder called selective mutism— while he/she can speak comfortably at home or with immediate family, he/she is unable to speak in other social situations (especially at school and in public). This behavior is not normal shyness, stubbornness, or defiance; instead, it is a fear of other people hearing his/her voice. It does not develop from abuse, bad parenting, or trauma—it has a biological basis like many anxiety disorders. At home or when fully comfortable, ________ is bright, funny, and engaging.
I am so happy that you are part of __________’s life, and the good news is that there are things you can do to help.
• Be warm and caring toward _____________. Please love and accept him/her
unconditionally. Know that although he/she cannot yet, he/she wants to speak to you.
• Give ___________ time to warm up when you first see him/her. It may take ____________ longer to warm up than other children, and during this time it is helpful not to ask direct questions. Instead, feel free to play with __________, comment on what he/she is doing, and give quiet praise.
• When you have time, playing or interacting with ___________ in a one-on-one basis is likely the best way to relate to him/her. . . and it is in these moments that he/she might be more likely to talk to you.
• After the warm-up time, look for opportunities to ask him/her a question. Give _________ 5 seconds to think about his/her responses and build up his/her bravery. __________ is not ignoring you or being rude—he/she is simply building up confidence.
• You can reword questions if __________ is not able to answer you. For example, you could ask the question as a forced choice question (“Which snack do you want—an apple or an orange?”) or a yes/no question (“Do you want an apple?”) instead of an open-ended question (“What do you want to eat?”).
• If ___________ does talk, please don’t make a big deal out of it. • Please don’t try to bribe ________ to talk. It usually does not work and can put a lot of extra pressure on him/her. 
It is not always easy when others don’t understand ______________’s diagnosis, and you could be a huge support to us as parents by:
• Understanding that this condition is not due to bad parenting—we are doing the best we can. It cannot be changed by discipline or harsh correcting, which is why we don’t use those strategies.
• Understanding that generally kids don’t grow out of it, which is why we are seeking professional help for the selective mutism. Please support us in that.
• Do say that you care and ask how you can help.
__________ is currently involved in therapy to learn how to be braver and stronger, and is working hard.
If you would like to learn more about selective mutism, visit www.selectivemutism.org. Thank you for caring about ___________.
Sincerely,

亲爱的家人和朋友们，
您可能已经注意到__________很难与您交谈，有时甚至让他/她对您做出回应。 ___________有一种叫做选择性缄默症的焦虑症 - 虽然他/她可以在家里或与直系亲属说话舒服，但他/她却无法在其他社交场合（特别是在学校和公共场合）说话。这种行为不是正常的羞怯，固执或蔑视;相反，它是害怕其他人听到他/她的声音。它不是由虐待，不良养育或创伤引起的 - 它具有像许多焦虑症一样的生物学基础。在家里或完全舒服的时候，________是明亮，有趣和吸引人的。
我很高兴你是__________生活的一部分，而好消息是有些事情可以帮助你。
•保持温暖和关怀_____________。请爱和接受他/她
无条件的。知道虽然他/她还不能，但他/她想和你说话。
•当您第一次见到他/她时，给___________时间预热。与其他孩子相比，可能需要____________更长时间的热身，在此期间，不要直接提问。相反，随意玩__________，评论他/她正在做什么，并给予安静的赞扬。
•如果您有时间，一对一地演奏或与___________互动可能是与他/她相关的最佳方式。 。 。正是在这些时刻，他/她可能更有可能与你交谈。
•在预热时间之后，寻找机会向他/她提问。给_________ 5秒时间思考他/她的反应并建立他/她的勇敢。 __________不是在忽视你或者是粗鲁 - 他/她只是在建立信心。
•如果__________无法回答您的问题，您可以重新提问。例如，您可以将问题视为强制选择问题（“您想要哪种零食 - 苹果或橙子？”）或是/否问题（“您想要苹果吗？”）而不是开放式问题结束了问题（“你想吃什么？”）。
•如果___________确实在说话，请不要大肆宣传。 •请不要试图贿赂________谈话。它通常不起作用，可能给他/她带来很大的压力。
当其他人不理解______________的诊断时，并不总是容易的，并且您可以通过以下方式为我们作为父母提供巨大支持：
•了解这种情况不是由于不良的养育 - 我们尽我们所能。它不能通过纪律或严厉的纠正来改变，这就是我们不使用这些策略的原因。
•了解一般孩子不会长大，这就是我们为选择性缄默症寻求专业帮助的原因。请支持我们。
•请说您关心并询问您如何提供帮助。
__________目前正在参与治疗，以学习如何勇敢和坚强，并努力工作。
如果您想了解有关选择性缄默症的更多信息，请访问www.selectivemutism.org。感谢关心___________。
此致


Peers also need instruction about the child with SM and reminders of how to help the child. Generally, I do not recommend excusing the child from class and having a discussion about selective mutism. I can almost guarantee that the moment the child returns to class, someone will let them know about the discussion and they will be mortified. Instead, when a peer asks why the child does not speak, or when the peer speaks for the child with selective mutism, it is helpful to pull them aside privately and explain: “Justin does talk at home, and he will talk here when he is ready. Until then, it is helpful if you play with him and are kind to him, but please don’t answer for him or ask why he does not talk.” If the child with SM is willing, encourage them to write a letter to peers at school explaining their diagnosis, how it impacts them, and what peers can do to help. An example letter for peers might include:
同伴们还需要有关SM的孩子的指导以及提醒如何帮助缄默症孩子。一般来说，我不建议将孩子排除在讨论选择性缄默症的课堂之外。我几乎可以保证孩子回到课堂的那一刻，有人会让他们知道讨论，他们会感到被羞辱。相反，当一个同伴问为什么孩子不说话，或者当同伴为选择性缄默的孩子说话时，私下将他们拉到一边并解释说：“贾斯汀在家里说话，他会在这里说话时准备好了。在那之前，如果你和他一起玩并且善待他，那就很有帮助，但是请不要回答他或者问他为什么不说话。“如果有SM的孩子愿意，鼓励他们写信给同龄人在学校解释他们的诊断，它如何影响他们，以及同行可以做些什么来帮助他们。同行的示例信函可能包括：

DEAR FRIEND, 
My name is Casey. I like animals, skiing, reading, and playing with my cat Ginger. I especially love riding my bike.
I also love to talk and love to make friends. But when I am at school, at birthday parties, or when I meet someone new, I get very nervous and cannot talk. I feel like the words get stuck in my throat. This is not because I do not like you. I have an anxiety disorder called selective mutism which sometimes makes it hard for me to talk to you. Here are some things you can do to help:
• When you first see me, don’t come running up to me and try to get me to talk. This only makes me more nervous.
• Please say hello to me but understand that it may take me time to respond to you. If I don’t answer, give me some time. If I wave and do not say “hello,” please do not think I am rude. I may feel very nervous and the words may be stuck.
• If you come over to see me at my house, maybe we could play with my Barbies® or videogames on my dad’s iPad. This helps me to get to know you better and feel more comfortable. As I get more comfortable, I may point or nod to you when you ask me a question. Or, I may tell my mom or dad something, and they can then tell you.
• I like it when you joke and have fun with me like you would with anyone else in the room.
• Please DO ask me questions, but ask me choice questions or yes/no questions rather than questions that I need to explain an answer to you. And, give me time to answer. You may have to ask the question again. It is fine and this helps me. I may point, nod, or write to you. Then, as I get comfortable, I may tell someone in front of you or answer you directly.
Thank you for taking the time to read this. I am trying hard to get braver but it takes some time and I need other people to help me. At first I am working on non-talking ways to answer you,  so I may nod, point or maybe write you a note. This helps me get comfortable using my words around you. Thank you for understanding.
Casey
亲爱的朋友，
我的名字是凯西。我喜欢动物，滑雪，阅读和玩猫姜。我特别喜欢骑自行车。
我也喜欢说话，喜欢结交朋友。但是当我在学校，生日派对或者遇到新人时，我会非常紧张，无法说话。我觉得这些话卡在我的喉咙里。这不是因为我不喜欢你。我有一种叫做选择性缄默症的焦虑症，有时候我很难跟你说话。以下是一些可以帮助的事情：
•当你第一次见到我时，不要跑到我面前试着让我说话。这只会让我更紧张。
•请向我问好，但要明白我可能需要时间回复你。如果我不回答，请给我一些时间。如果我挥手并且不说“你好”，请不要认为我很粗鲁。我可能会感到非常紧张，这些话可能会被卡住。
•如果你过来在我家看我，也许我们可以在爸爸的iPad上玩我的Barbies®或电子游戏。这有助于我更好地了解你，感觉更舒服。随着我越来越舒服，当你问我一个问题时，我可能会指点或点头。或者，我可以告诉我的妈妈或爸爸一些东西，然后他们可以告诉你。
•当你开玩笑的时候我喜欢它，就像你和房间里的其他人一样玩得开心。
•请问我问题，但问我选择问题或是/否问题，而不是我需要解答给你答案的问题。并且，给我时间回答。您可能需要再次提出问题。这很好，这对我有帮助。我可能会指点，点头或写信给你。然后，当我感到舒服时，我可能会告诉你面前的某个人或直接回答你。
感谢您抽出时间来阅读。我努力让自己变得勇敢，但需要一些时间，我需要其他人来帮助我。起初我正在以不说话的方式回答你的问题，所以我可能会点头，指出或者写一封信。这有助于我轻松使用你周围的文字。谢谢你的理解。

凯西


DO REGRESSIONS OCCUR?
Minor regressions occur on an everyday basis for kids with selective mutism. As mentioned previously, kids with selective mutism generally require a longer-than-typical warm-up time, and therefore it is very common for a child who is already verbal with me to need a few minutes to re-establish speech when I see them again. Each day of school may require a short period of time in the morning to return to previous functioning.
The longer the break in practices or exposure, the larger the possible regression. The summer break is often a time of regression for the child, since there are generally few social demands or school-related exposures during these months, and thus very little brave practicing. Likewise, if a child has not seen a family member or friend for quite some time, there may be a significant regression. For instance, if a child only sees grandparents once a year, then each year they may revert back to mutism when interacting with the grandparents again.
Generally, interventions can help reduce or eliminate these regressions. There are several options for brave practices during the summer, including Skyping with grandparents regularly, summer visits by the teacher or keyworker, or preparing for school by attending a summer camp. Occasionally, a large change or upsetting event can result in a more obvious and longstanding regression. Puberty, changing to a new school (particularly moving from elementary school to middle school, where there are many teachers and the demand for independence is high), and a socially embarrassing event can set a child back. If that occurs, revisiting behavioral treatment may be necessary.

缄默症会复发吗？
对于有选择性缄默症的孩子，每天都会发生轻微的退步。如前所述，选择性缄默症的孩子通常需要比预期更长的预热时间，因此，当我看到他们时，已经口头对我的孩子需要几分钟重新建立语音是很常见的。再次。每天上学可能需要在早上很短的时间才能恢复到以前的功能。
实践或暴露中断的时间越长，可能的回归越大。暑假通常是孩子回归的时期，因为在这几个月中，社交需求或与学校相关的暴露通常很少，因此很少有勇敢的练习。同样，如果孩子在很长一段时间内没有见过家人​​或朋友，可能会有明显的倒退。例如，如果一个孩子每年只看一次祖父母，那么每年他们可能会在与祖父母再次互动时恢复缄默。
通常，干预可以帮助减少或消除这些复发/退步。在夏季，有多种勇敢的做法可供选择，包括定期与祖父母进行Skyping，老师或关键工作者的夏季访问，或参加夏令营准备上学。偶尔，大的变化或沮丧事件可能导致更明显和长期的回归。青春期，改为新学校（特别是从小学到中学，那里有很多老师和对独立的需求很高），一个社会尴尬的事件可以让孩子回归。如果发生这种情况，可能需要重新审视行为治疗。
CHAPTER 7
INTEGRATING TREATMENT INTO THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT
The anxiety and lack of speech associated with selective mutism frequently results in academic limitations for children with SM. Many children cannot ask clarifying questions, provide an oral presentation, participate effectively and fully in a group project, request to use the restroom, make and keep social relationships, or ask for help if injured. These limitations suggest the need for a special education plan such as a Section 504 Plan or an Individualized Education Plan (IEP).
A Section 504 Plan is an adaptations and modifications plan specifically intended for the classroom setting (mandated by the civil rights law establishing the rights of individuals with disabilities). This document provides the child with in-classroom accommodations, but no direct, individualized services (i.e., the child will not obtain one-on-one sessions with the keyworker). The Section 504 Plan may be an appropriate fit for students with mild selective mutism who do not need specialized services but instead may need minor accommodations for specific situations, such as oral presentations.
Alternatively, an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) is a specialized program within the school setting designed to meet a child’s specific needs (mandated by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act—IDEA). A child must qualify for an IEP via federal regulations and, if a disability is identified that meets federal criteria, the plan identifies accommodations and interventions both in the classroom and through related service providers in the school. Simply put, an IEP is the legal document that opens the doors to both in-classroom accommodations (e.g., preferential seating next to communication partners, alternative ways to do oral presentations, etc.) as well as direct, individualized services (e.g., one-on-one “brave work” with the keyworker in the school).
第7章
将治疗融入学校环境
与选择性缄默症相关的焦虑和缺乏言语经常导致SM患儿的学术限制。许多孩子不能要求澄清问题，提供口头陈述，有效和充分参与小组项目，要求使用洗手间，建立和保持社会关系，或在受伤时寻求帮助。这些限制表明需要特殊的教育计划，如504条款计划或个性化教育计划（IEP）。
第504节计划是专门针对课堂环境的修改和修改计划（由建立残疾人权利的民权法授权）。该文件为儿童提供课堂内的住宿，但没有直接的个性化服务（即，儿童不会与重点工作者进行一对一的会谈）。第504节计划可能适合于那些不需要专门服务的轻度选择性缄默症的学生，但可能需要针对特定​​情况的小型住宿，例如口头陈述。
或者，个性化教育计划（IEP）是学校环境中的一个专门计划，旨在满足儿童的特定需求（由残疾人教育法案 -  IDEA授权）。儿童必须通过联邦法规获得IEP资格，如果确定残疾符合联邦标准，该计划将确定课堂和学校相关服务提供者的住宿和干预措施。简而言之，IEP是法律文件，为教室内的住宿打开了大门（例如，通信伙伴旁边的优惠座位，口头陈述的替代方式等）以及直接的个性化服务（例如，一个）与学校的关键工作者一起“勇敢地工作”。

An IEP is generally necessary, since most children with selective mutism need to begin their “brave work” in a one-on-one setting with an interventionist. In order to qualify for an IEP, a child needs more than just a diagnosis of a disability. There must be evidence that the disability has an adverse effect on the child’s educational progress. This is the sticking point for many schools who have children with selective mutism—most children with SM are smart, capable, and manage to do well academically despite the lack of speech.
Some schools are hesitant to provide special education planning or intervention to children with selective mutism if there is not an overt negative academic impact. If the school is willing to provide intervention on a regular basis without an official special education plan, this might be a wonderful first step. Parents and school professionals should keep logs of the response to intervention as well as the consistency of the intervention (assuming that the response) is consistently meeting goals and the consistency is as promised, an official plan may not be necessary.
If, however, a school is unwilling or unable to provide consistent intervention in a oneon-one format, a special education plan may be necessary to legally ascertain services. The first step toward requesting special education services is through a written letter to the school. A sample letter is provided on page 130. Parents should highlight their specific concerns, particularly the ways that the child is impacted academically by selective mutism. Common impacts of selective mutism include:
IEP通常是必要的，因为大多数有选择性缄默症的孩子需要在干预者的一对一环境中开始他们的“勇敢工作”。为了获得IEP资格，儿童需要的不仅仅是残疾诊断。必须有证据表明残疾对孩子的教育进步有不利影响。这是许多有孩子选择性缄默症的学校的关键点 - 大多数有SM的孩子聪明，有能力，并且尽管缺乏言语，但仍能在学业上取得好成绩。
如果没有明显的负面学术影响，一些学校对于选择性缄默症儿童提供特殊教育规划或干预犹豫不决。如果学校愿意在没有官方特殊教育计划的情况下定期提供干预，这可能是一个美好的第一步。家长和学校专业人员应该记录干预的响应记录以及干预的一致性（假设响应）始终如一地达到目标并且一致性是承诺的，可能没有必要制定官方计划。
但是，如果学校不愿意或无法以一对一的形式提供一致的干预，则可能需要特殊的教育计划来合法确定服务。申请特殊教育服务的第一步是写给学校的书面信。第130页提供了一封样本信函。家长应强调他们的具体问题，特别是选择性缄默导致儿童在学业上受到影响的方式。选择性缄默的共同影响包括：

• Difficulty or inability to participate in group work or group projects
• Difficulty or inability to participate in oral presentations
• Inability to ask clarifying questions or request help from the teacher
• Inability, difficulty, or inaccuracy in participating in the academic assessment process
• Difficulty or inability to benefit from social learning opportunities
• Difficulty or inability to learn and practice collaborative problem-solving techniques
• Difficulty or inability to engage the assistance of others when necessary for educational, health or safety reasons
• Inability to learn through repetition of concepts by teaching others
• Inappropriate types of behaviors or feelings under normal circumstances
The main goal of the educational institution is to prepare a child for higher-level education or a vocation following graduation. If a child does not speak, how will he or she be successfully prepared for college or a vocation?
•难以或无法参加小组工作或小组项目
•难以或无法参加口头报告
•无法向教师提出澄清问题或请求帮助
•参与学术评估过程的无能，困难或不准确
•难以或无法从社交学习机会中受益
•难以或无法学习和实践协作解决问题的技巧
•出于教育，健康或安全原因，在必要时难以或无法为他人提供帮助
•无法通过教导他人重复概念来学习
•正常情况下不适当的行为或感受
教育机构的主要目标是为孩子提供高等教育或毕业后的职业。如果孩子不说话，他或她将如何成功地为大学或职业做好准备？

Once a written letter has been delivered, the school will begin determining if a child meets the criteria for special education services. To make this determination, a number of requirements must be fulfilled, including documented interventions and the child’s response (or lack of response) and psycho- educational evaluation which may consist of those evaluative tools listed in Chapter 3. This information is taken together to make the determination of whether or not a child qualifies for Special Education. In order to obtain an IEP, the child must meet certain criteria for a designation of services. The most common designations to obtain services for children with selective mutism are:
Speech/Language Impairment (SLI) or Communication Impairment (CI)—defined as a communication disorder that adversely affects a child’s learning. A language disorder “may be characterized by difficulty in understanding and producing language, including word meanings (semantics), the components of words (morphology), the components of sentences (syntax), or the conventions of conversation (pragmatics)” (Head Start, 2006). Children with selective mutism may have primary disabilities in speech (including semantics, articulation, and fluency), but also have social pragmatic speech weaknesses (the ability to utilize speech effectively in social situations).
Other Health Impaired (OHI)—defined as a child who has a chronic or acute health condition that limits alertness to the educational environment due to either limited strength, vitality, and alertness or heightened alertness to the surrounding environment. Like other designations, this issue must impair academic performance (Grice, 2002).
Emotional Disturbance/Disability (ED)—defined as a child whose education is impacted by one or more of the following:
• An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual, sensory, or health factors.
• An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and teachers.
• Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal circumstances.
• A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression.
• A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school problems.
一旦发出书面信函，学校将开始确定孩子是否符合特殊教育服务的标准。为了做出这一决定，必须满足一些要求，包括记录在案的干预措施和儿童的反应（或缺乏反应）和心理教育评估，这些评估可能包括第3章中列出的那些评估工具。这些信息是一起制作的。确定儿童是否有资格接受特殊教育。为了获得IEP，孩子必须满足某些服务指定标准。为选择性缄默儿童提供服务的最常见名称是：
言语/语言障碍（SLI）或沟通障碍（CI） - 定义为对儿童学习产生不利影响的沟通障碍。语言障碍“的特征可能是难以理解和产生语言，包括词义（语义），词语的组成部分（形态学），句子的组成部分（语法）或会话惯例（语用学）”（Head Start） ，2006）。具有选择性缄默症的儿童可能在言语中具有初级残疾（包括语义，清晰度和流利性），但也具有社会语用语言弱点（在社交场合有效利用言语的能力）。
其他健康受损（OHI） - 定义为患有慢性或急性健康状况的儿童，由于强度，活力，警觉性或对周围环境的警觉性提高而限制对教育环境的警觉性。与其他指定一样，这个问题必然会影响学业成绩（Grice，2002）。
情绪障碍/残疾（ED） - 定义为受教育程度受以下一项或多项影响的儿童：
•无法学习无法通过智力，感官或健康因素来解释。
•无法与同龄人和教师建立或维持令人满意的人际关系。
•正常情况下不适当的行为或感受。
•一种普遍的不快乐或抑郁情绪。
•出现与个人或学校问题相关的身体症状或恐惧的倾向。
While all of these designations have different requirements, they all simply open the door to services for the child. Once that door to services is opened, the specific services and interventions are determined by the individual need of the child, not the designation itself. Many practitioners feel that speech/language impairment and other health impaired are the most fitting designations, but in the end the issue that matters the most is not how we label it, but that the child with selective mutism obtains the services they require. For more information on the steps of the IEP process, what to expect from the meeting, and how to successfully advocate for your child, Wrights Law (www.wrightslaw.com) has a multitude of resources. This website is not specific to selective mutism, but can be extremely helpful for parents navigating the special education process.
It is important to note that many schools are unfamiliar with selective mutism and may not understand the etiology and implications. Parents, teachers, and administrators are encouraged to learn more about selective mutism during this process, either through reading books and research articles on selective mutism or inviting a psychologist with experience in selective mutism to present information and train staff. Without proper knowledge, school interventions may not be fully effective and special education goals may be not be appropriate.
Once the child has been made eligible for an IEP or Section 504 Plan (or just an unofficial intervention plan), accommodations and interventions need to be spelled out clearly. A list of possible interventions and accommodations can be seen on page 131. From this list, it is important to highlight:
虽然所有这些名称都有不同的要求，但它们都只是为孩子提供服务的大门。一旦打开服务之门，具体的服务和干预措施将由儿童的个人需求决定，而不是指定本身。许多从业者认为言语/语言障碍和其他健康障碍是最合适的名称，但最重要的问题不是我们如何标记它，而是选择性缄默的孩子获得他们需要的服务。有关IEP流程步骤，会议期望以及如何成功为您的孩子提倡的更多信息，Wrights Law（www.wrightslaw.com）拥有众多资源。本网站并非专门针对选择性缄默症，但对于导航特殊教育过程的父母非常有帮助。
值得注意的是，许多学校不熟悉选择性缄默症，可能不了解病因和影响。鼓励家长，教师和行政人员在此过程中更多地了解选择性缄默症，或者通过阅读有关选择性缄默症的书籍和研究文章，或邀请具有选择性缄默经验的心理学家来提供信息和培训员工。如果没有适当的知识，学校干预可能不会完全有效，特殊教育目标可能不合适。
一旦孩子有资格获得IEP或504条计划（或只是非正式的干预计划），就需要明确说明住宿和干预措施。可在第131页上查看可能的干预措施和住宿清单。从此列表中，重点强调：

• Of all interventions and accommodations, the most important one is desensitization in the school setting. While the other accommodations will likely make a child much more comfortable (which is very important), the structured desensitization through stimulus fading or communication ladders is the mode through which communication begins and is generalized to the school as a whole. Intervention plans for children with SM are always a balance of providing intervention to assist in increasing communication as well as accommodations to increase comfort, social interactions with peers, and self-confidence.
• The desensitization intervention must occur frequently and consistently; at least three times per week for fifteen minutes. The benefits and implications of more intensive intervention were described in chapter 5, which would suggest the benefit of even more frequent and longer practices.
• Interventions generally start with pull-outs (i.e., the child is pulled out of the classroom to meet one-on-one with the keyworker) and progress to the keyworker “pushing in” to the classroom (i.e., the keyworker comes to the classroom and assists in generalizing attained speech to peers, teacher, and classroom activities). The end goal for intervention is not focused on the child speaking to the keyworker—the goal is to help generalize the brave talking to the classroom and general school setting.
•在所有干预措施和住宿中，最重要的是在学校环境中脱敏。虽然其他住宿可能会让孩子更舒服（这非常重要），但通过刺激消退或沟通阶梯进行的结构化脱敏是沟通开始的模式，并被推广到整个学校。 SM儿童的干预计划始终是提供干预以帮助增加沟通以及提高舒适度，与同伴进行社交互动以及自信的便利的平衡。
•脱敏干预必须经常一致地进行;每周至少三次，持续十五分钟。第5章描述了更强化干预的益处和影响，这将表明更频繁和更长时间的做法的好处。
•干预通常从拉出开始（即，孩子被拉出教室以与主要工作者一对一地会面）并且进入关键工作者“推进”到教室（即，关键工作者来到教室）课堂和协助将同伴，老师和课堂活动的演讲推广到一起）。干预的最终目标不是关注孩子与关键工作者交谈 - 目标是帮助推广勇敢的谈话与课堂和普通学校环境。

• The start of the school year is a very important time for children with selective mutism, as it sets the stage for the rapport the child will have with their teacher and peers, and sets the expectation of the child as to whether they will be able to communicate this year. It is strongly recommended that the child meet with the teacher prior to the start of the school year. The typical open house is not a good opportunity to meet and build rapport and comfort with a new teacher, as it tends to be chaotic, busy, and filled with numerous peers and parents. Instead, it is recommended that the teacher and child meet one-on-one (or with the parent). It is beneficial if this occurs both outside of the school setting (perhaps in a comfortable setting such as the child’s home, the playground, the zoo, or a dog park) as well as inside the classroom setting (the child can come in a few days prior to the start of school and be a “helper” in setting up the classroom). The best generalization of speech happens when the practice occurs “in situ,” or in the actual environment and situation. Thus, even after school starts, it is recommended that the child spend some time with the parent before or after school just being verbal in the school setting. This time helps the child with SM pair the academic setting with comfortable conversation. If the child is particularly anxious, even speaking to parents near the school setting can be good practice. Finally, pictures of the classroom and teacher can be used to make a “school book” to be looked at in the home, in order to prepare the child for change and get them comfortable with the new setting and teacher.
•对于有选择性缄默症的儿童来说，学年开始是一个非常重要的时期，因为它为孩子与老师和同伴建立融洽关系奠定了基础，并为孩子设定了他们是否能够做到的期望今年要沟通。强烈建议孩子在学年开始前与老师见面。典型的开放日不是与新老师见面和建立融洽关系和舒适的好机会，因为它往往是混乱，忙碌，充满了许多同龄人和父母。相反，建议老师和孩子一对一（或与父母一对一）见面。如果这种情况发生在学校环境之外（可能在孩子的家，操场，动物园或狗公园等舒适的环境中）以及教室内（孩子可以进入一些）在学校开始前几天，成为教室的“帮手”。当实践发生在“原地”或在实际环境和情况下时，语言的最佳概括发生。因此，即使在学校开学之后，也建议孩子在学校之前或之后与父母一起度过一段时间。这次帮助SM的孩子对学术环境进行舒适的交谈。如果孩子特别焦虑，即使对学校附近的父母说话也可以是好习惯。最后，教室和教师的照片可以用来制作一本在家里看的“学校书”，以便为孩子做好准备，让他们适应新的环境和老师。
• One possible strategy that requires very little effort by either parents or the teacher prior to school’s starting is a phone call with the new teacher. First, a few (3-5) scripted (pre- determined) questions are developed by parents that hit on the child’s interests or unique experiences/characteristics (e.g., “What kind of pet do you have?” “Where did you go on your favorite vacation?”). Make sure that these questions are not yes/no (as this may inhibit speech) but require only a short response. The child first is recorded by the parent answering the questions. Then, the teacher phones the child and asks the predetermined questions. While looking at a photo of the teacher (if possible), the child plays the recorded responses to each of the questions. In the same phone call, the questions are asked again and the child answers by speaking along with the recording. Finally, the child answers the same questions again without the recording. When the child meets the teacher in person a few days or weeks later, the questions provide a good ice- breaker for the pair and can lead to additional conversations.
•在学校开始之前，父母或老师需要很少努力的一种可能的策略是与新老师打电话。首先，一些（3-5）脚本（预先确定）的问题由父母制定，这些问题会影响孩子的兴趣或独特的经历/特征（例如，“你有什么样的宠物？”“你去哪儿了？”你最喜欢的假期？“）。确保这些问题不是是/否（因为这可能会抑制语音），但只需要很短的回复。孩子首先由回答问题的父母记录。然后，教师给孩子打电话并询问预定的问题。在查看教师的照片（如果可能）时，孩子会播放对每个问题的记录回答。在同一个电话中，再次询问问题，孩子通过与录音一起说话来回答问题。最后，孩子在没有录音的情况下再次回答相同的问题。几天或几周后，当孩子亲自与老师见面时，这些问题为这对学生提供了良好的破冰机，可以带来额外的对话。

TERMINATING INTERVENTIONS
Thankfully, with effective treatment most children come to a point where they are indistinguishable from their peers in the classroom and no longer need intensive intervention. This can be determined through a classroom observation, teacher and parent interview, updated scores on the Selective Mutism Questionnaire, and qualitative knowledge of the child’s abilities. It is important when determining if a child is ready to stop direct services to consider their ability both to respond and initiate. It is easy when a child is consistently responding to believe they do not need services, but the child still needs to be able to ask questions, advocate for themselves, and initiate verbally and nonverbally to others. When the child and teacher are fully capable of continuing the “brave practices” alone, and the child can consistently initiate and respond to most people in most situations, the keyworker may be able to decrease the frequency of meetings with the child. Consideration could be given to terminating a special education plan, bearing in mind whether the child continues to need accommodations for oral presentations, group projects, initiating with peers and adults, etc. Schools must be careful that the plan is not terminated too early—sometimes children may still need accommodations for transitioning grades or moving to a new school (i.e., middle or high school, where expectations of verbal participation are significantly increased).
In the clinical setting, services can be decreased or terminated when treatment goals are met. Generally, treatment ends when the child has experienced a significant improvement in speech and confidence, and the parent, teacher, and school feel comfortable continuing to carry out the desensitization plan.


终止干预
值得庆幸的是，通过有效的治疗，大多数孩子在课堂上与同龄人无法区分，不再需要强化干预。这可以通过课堂观察，教师和家长访谈，选择性突变问卷的最新分数以及孩子能力的定性知识来确定。在确定孩子是否准备好停止直接服务以考虑他们的回应和启动能力时，这一点很重要。当孩子一直回答相信他们不需要服务时，这很容易，但是孩子仍然需要能够提出问题，为自己辩护，并在口头和非语言上向他人发起。当孩子和老师完全有能力单独继续“勇敢的做法”，并且孩子可以在大多数情况下始终如一地发起并回应大多数人，关键工作者可能能够减少与孩子会面的频率。可以考虑终止一项特殊教育计划，同时考虑到儿童是否继续需要住宿进行口头陈述，小组项目，与同龄人和成年人一起开始等。学校必须小心，计划不能过早终止 - 有时候儿童可能仍然需要住宿来过渡成绩或搬到新学校（即中学或高中，其中口头参与的期望显着增加）。
在临床环境中，当达到治疗目标时，可以减少或终止服务。一般来说，当孩子的言语和自信心得到显着改善时，治疗就会结束，而家长，老师和学校会感到很舒服，继续执行脱敏计划。

CHAPTER 8
PAST “JUST TALKING”— BUILDING A’S CONFIDENCE
We have spent the past seven chapters discussing strategies to increase speech. Although increasing speech in children with selective mutism is arguably the most important behavioral goal, it is only a piece of the puzzle. It is important to see the child with selective mutism as a whole, and therefore this last chapter will address some of the other potential pieces that make up the puzzle of selective mutism.
Much of what this book has discussed thus far is based on behavioral therapy (i.e., utilizing strategies to address the specific behavioral symptoms of selective mutism). Generally, practitioners do not attempt cognitive behavioral therapy with children younger than approximately 7 years of age, since cognitive intervention necessitates that children can be aware of their internal assumptions and perceptions. This ability does not typically develop until approximately the age of 6 to 9 years (depending on the child’s cognitive development). For children with selective mutism who are intelligent, perceptive, and a mid-elementary or older, utilizing some cognitive strategies within the context of treatment may be beneficial.
第八章
超越“只是谈话” - 建立自信
我们在过去的七章中讨论了增加言论的策略。虽然选择性缄默症儿童的言语增加可以说是最重要的行为目标，但它只是一个难题。重要的是要看到孩子选择性缄默作为一个整体，因此最后一章将讨论构成选择性缄默症这一难题的其他一些潜在的部分。
到目前为止，本书所讨论的大部分内容都是基于行为疗法（即利用策略来解决选择性缄默症的特定行为症状）。通常，从业者不会尝试与年龄小于7岁的儿童进行认知行为治疗，因为认知干预需要儿童了解他们的内部假设和感知。这种能力通常不会发展到大约6至9岁（取决于孩子的认知发展）。对于有选择性缄默症的儿童，他们聪明，有洞察力，中小学或年长者，在治疗环境中使用一些认知策略可能是有益的。

DECREASING NEGATIVE THOUGHTS
Cognitive interventions focus on the negative or irrational thought patterns that lead to unhelpful or maladaptive behaviors. Henry Ford was correct when he stated, “Whether you think you can or think you cannot—you are right.” A child who believes that they will not do well on a test may feel helpless and not attempt to study a great deal, resulting in poor testing outcomes. That maladaptive scenario began with a negative thought about ability or potential outcomes of the test. In the same way, children with selective mutism may demonstrate negative thought patterns about speaking, socializing, or interacting verbally in the classroom or public settings. Some negative or maladaptive thoughts in children with selective mutism might include:
• “I just don’t have anything to say.”
• “I will not be able to say it correctly.”
• “If I talk, everyone will make a big deal.”
• “If I get the wrong answer, people will laugh at me.”
• “I have tried to talk before, and wasn’t able to get the words out then. What’s different this time?”
减少负面的想法
认知干预集中于导致无益或适应不良行为的消极或非理性思维模式。当亨利·福特说：“你是否认为自己能做到或者认为自己不能做到这一点时，他是正确的。”一个相信自己在考试中表现不佳的孩子可能会感到无助而不会尝试学习很多东西。在测试结果不佳。这种适应不良的情景始于对测试能力或潜在结果的负面想法。同样，有选择性缄默症的儿童可能会在课堂或公共环境中表现出口头，社交或口头交流的负面思维模式。选择性缄默症儿童的一些消极或适应不良的想法可能包括：
•“我只是无话可说。”
•“我无法正确说出来。”
•“如果我说话，每个人都会做出很大的贡献。”
•“如果我得到了错误的答案，人们会嘲笑我。”
•“我之前曾尝试过谈话，但当时无法说出来。这次有什么不同？“

Many of these self-statements have a kernel of truth, and therefore attempting to argue with the child may not be beneficial. Instead, it is beneficial to teach the child new self-statements, script and role-play for new events, and provide them with coping strategies in case some of their fears do come true.
First, we must identify the assumptions and perceptions that accompany the fear of speaking. If the child is unable to take this step, then cognitive interventions are not recommended. In order to identify the negative assumptions, adults could ask the child questions such as, “What makes it hard to talk?” or, “What are you thinking or saying to yourself when it is hard to talk?” Many times, children describe their experience to their parents, and therefore parents can be excellent reporters on what sorts of thoughts get in the way of speaking.
这些自我陈述中的许多都有真实的核心，因此试图与孩子争论可能没有益处。相反，教导孩子新事件的新自我陈述，剧本和角色扮演是有益的，并为他们提供应对策略，以防他们的某些恐惧成真。
首先，我们必须确定伴随着害怕说话的假设和观念。如果孩子无法采取这一步骤，则不建议进行认知干预。为了识别消极的假设，成年人可以问孩子这样的问题，例如“什么使得说话变得困难？”或者“当你难以说话时，你在想什么或者说什么呢？”很多时候，孩子们都在描述他们对父母的经历，因此父母可以成为优秀的记者，他们会说出什么样的想法。

If the child notes a fear of speaking incorrectly or giving an incorrect response, adults can modify their questions to reduce the fear of an incorrect answer. For example, teachers may ask the child questions in a forced-choice format, with only one obvious answer (the other choice being silly or obviously incorrect). Alternatively, the teachers may help the child practice responding in the classroom via shaping:
• First, the child practices raising their hand to show knowledge, with the understanding that the teacher will not call on them.
• Second, the teacher lets the child know that they will be calling on them during a specific time of the lesson, and tells the child exactly what they will be asking so that the child knows the answer with certainty.
• Third, the teacher calls on the child without preparation, but only if the child’s hand is raised. Children with SM should not be called on randomly if they are not indicating knowledge of the answer.
If the child fears that other children will overreact when they speak, the child could write a letter to peers asking them to please not “make a big deal out of it” when they do speak. It is important that peers and adults know to be matter-of-fact and calm when the child talks— pointing out that they spoke and asking them repeatedly to speak again likely increases the child’s anxiety.
Cognitive restructuring, or changing maladaptive thought patterns, involves identifying negative thoughts, challenging them, and replacing them with more appropriate, balanced, helpful thoughts. For example, if a child believes that because they were not able to speak in the past they will not be able to speak in the future, the interventionist can work with the child to determine whether that sort of statement holds true. Excellent workbooks exist for cognitive intervention, including Coping Cat by Phillip C. Kendall and Kristina A. Hedtke (www.copingcat.net) and Think Good, Feel Good by Paul Stallard for younger children and The Shyness and Social Anxiety Workbook for Teens by Jennifer Shannon for adolescents.
如果孩子注意到对说错误或给出错误回答的恐惧，成年人可以修改他们的问题以减少对错误答案的恐惧。例如，教师可能会以强制选择的形式询问孩子的问题，只有一个明显的答案（另一个选择是愚蠢或明显不正确）。或者，教师可以通过塑造以下方式帮助孩子在课堂上练习：
•首先，孩子练习举手表达知识，并明白老师不会拜访他们。
•其次，教师让孩子知道他们将在课程的特定时间内打电话给他们，并告诉孩子他们将要问的确切内容，以便孩子确切地知道答案。
•第三，老师在没有准备的情况下给孩子打电话，但只有孩子的手被抬起。如果没有表明对答案的了解，则不应随意呼叫患有SM的儿童。
如果孩子担心其他孩子在说话时会反应过度，孩子可以给同龄人写一封信，要求他们在说话时不要“大肆宣传”。重要的是，当孩子说话时，同龄人和成年人都知道事实和平静 - 指出他们说话并反复要求他们再说话可能会增加孩子的焦虑。
认知重组或改变适应不良的思维模式，包括识别消极思想，挑战它们，并用更恰当，平衡，有用的思想取而代之。例如，如果孩子认为因为他们过去不能说话而他们将来不会说话，那么干预主义者可以与孩子一起确定这种陈述是否成立。优秀的工作手册可用于认知干预，包括Phillip C. Kendall和Kristina A. Hedtke（www.copingcat.net）的Coping Cat和Paul Stallard为年幼孩子设计的Think Good，Feel Good以及Jennifer的青少年害羞和社交焦虑工作手册香农为青少年。

INCREASING SELF-CONFIDENCE
Think of a time recently when you felt really self-confident. What were you doing? What had just occurred? For most of us, self-confidence comes both from feeling that others value you and feeling successful, worthy, or talented. Some ways to increase self-confidence in kids with selective mutism include:
• Spend uninterrupted time with your child. Play what they want to play. Talk about what they want to talk about. Do what they want to do, and follow their lead. Special time like this helps children feel valued, loved, and appreciated.
• Help the child build success in speaking through the slow, steady steps outlined in this book.
Success builds on success, and even small steps are movements in the right direction.
• Make a “Brave Chart” for your refrigerator at home (if you are a parent) or office at school
(if you are a keyworker), and list the brave activities or brave work your child has accomplished. Remind them frequently of all their accomplishments, and how much braver and stronger they have become. Encourage teens to document on their phones or journal all of the steps they have taken (even the small ones) and look back at it on a regular basis.
• Praise success, but also praise efforts. Life is not always about outcomes; sometimes children try
very hard but are not quite successful. They should be praised for their efforts.
• Encourage the child to develop talents that are not speech-based. For example, many children
with SM are wonderful singers, beautiful dancers, or talented soccer players. Children need to feel that they are good at something, and these extracurricular activities not only allow them to feel talented but also provide excellent social opportunities for brave practices.
• Display self-confidence yourself. Self-confidence is not the absence of worry or nervousness; it is the ability to stand and act in the face of those feelings. When a situation comes up that makes you feel nervous, tell the child your worries (assuming that the situation is age-appropriate and does not directly involve the child). Then, tell the child the confident self-statements that help you be brave in the face of worry. For example, if you have a big deadline at work, you might explain to the child that you feel nervous thinking that you cannot finish in time. However, you have finished projects before deadlines in the past, and you know that if you work hard you are completely capable of finishing.

提高自信心
想想最近你真正自信的时候。你在做什么？刚刚发生了什么？对于我们大多数人来说，自信来自感觉别人重视你并感受到成功，有价值或有才能。一些提高选择性缄默症儿童自信心的方法包括：
•与孩子一起度过不间断的时间。玩他们想玩的东西。谈谈他们想谈什么。做他们想做的事，并跟随他们的领导。这样的特殊时间可以帮助孩子感受到被重视，被爱和被欣赏。
•通过本书中概述的缓慢，稳定的步骤，帮助孩子成功说话。
成功建立在成功的基础上，即使是小步骤也是朝着正确方向发展的。
•为您家中的冰箱（如果您是父母）或学校办公室制作“勇敢的图表”
（如果您是一名关键工作者），并列出您的孩子已经完成的勇敢的活动或勇敢的工作。经常提醒他们所有的成就，以及他们变得多么勇敢和坚强。鼓励青少年在他们的手机或日志上记录他们采取的所有步骤（即使是小步骤），并定期回顾它。
•赞美成功，也赞美努力。生活并不总是关于结果;有时孩子会尝试
非常努力但不太成功。应该赞扬他们的努力。
•鼓励孩子培养成为不依赖言语能力的人才。例如，很多孩子与SM是美妙的歌手，美丽的舞者，或有才华的足球运动员。孩子们需要感觉自己擅长某些事情，而这些课外活动不仅让他们感到有才能，而且还为勇敢的实践提供了极好的社交机会。
•自己展示自信。自信不是没有忧虑或紧张;它是站在这些感情面前表现和行动的能力。当出现让您感到紧张的情况时，请告诉孩子您的担忧（假设情况适合年龄并且不直接涉及孩子）。然后，告诉孩子自信的自我陈述，帮助你在面对忧虑时勇敢。例如，如果您的工作期限很长，您可以向孩子解释您认为自己无法及时完成的​​紧张感。但是，您在过去的截止日期之前完成了项目，并且您知道如果您努力工作，您完全有能力完成。

SOCIAL SKILLS TRAINING 
Research does not demonstrate a fundamental deficit in social skill acquisition for children with selective mutism. However, since kids with SM have significantly fewer social interactions, it is not uncommon that they are socially immature, lack some social awareness, or don’t demonstrate age-appropriate social skills. Social skills training or role-playing social interactions can be helpful for two reasons.
First, it helps children “script” social situations. A script is a sequence of expected behaviors for a situation. Most adults have a script for social situations. If you are going to the doctor’s office, the script likely includes checking in, sitting in the waiting room until you are called, relocating to an examination room, and speaking to the physician. Then you will check out at the front desk and leave. Without a script, anxiety and uncertainty would reign. What if you were going to go to the doctor’s office, but you had no idea what would occur there? You did not know how much you were expected to pay, what the doctor would do or say, whether you would be safe or unsafe, and who might be allowed to see you in one of those open-backed gowns. In situations without scripts, most individuals feel ill-prepared, uncertain, anxious, and avoidant. Scripts help not only to reduce anxiety but also to build new language, social, and activity routines for children (Barnett et al., 2007). Possible scripts include how to order at a restaurant, interrupt someone who is not already attentive to you, introduce yourself, ask a friend to play, etc.
社交技能培训
研究并未证明选择性缄默症儿童的社会技能获取存在根本性缺陷。然而，由于患有SM的孩子的社交互动明显较少，因此他们在社交方面不成熟，缺乏一些社会意识或不展示适合年龄的社交技能的情况并不少见。社交技能培训或角色扮演社交互动可能有两个原因。
首先，它有助于儿童“编写”社交场合。脚本是一种情境的预期行为序列。大多数成年人都有社交场合的剧本。如果你去医生办公室，脚本可能包括办理入住手续，坐在候诊室，直到你被叫，搬到检查室，并与医生交谈。然后，您将在前台退房并离开。如果没有剧本，焦虑和不确定将会统治。如果你要去医生办公室怎么办，但你不知道那里会发生什么？您不知道您应该支付多少钱，医生会做什么或说什么，您是安全还是不安全，以及谁可能被允许在其中一件开背式礼服中看到您。在没有脚本的情况下，大多数人都感到准备不足，不确定，焦虑和回避。脚本不仅有助于减少焦虑，还有助于为儿童建立新的语言，社交和活动习惯（Barnett等，2007）。可能的脚本包括如何在餐厅订购，打断一个尚未关注您的人，介绍自己，请朋友玩，等等。

Second, social skills training allows the opportunity to learn and practice social interactions in a safe, comfortable setting. When teaching a new skill, adults often stop when the child seems to have initially mastered the skill, and then expect that the child will easily utilize that new skill in each and every situation. “Overlearning” is a term used for practicing much beyond the initial mastery of a newly acquired skill; overlearning leads to expanded mastery and automaticity of a skill. The Yerkes-Dodson law predicts that overlearning will significantly increase the use of the behavior even in high-arousal states (Rohrer, 2005). In layman’s terms, if a child practices a social behavior to the point of complete and total mastery and even beyond to the point of boredom, it becomes automatic and therefore can be done in their sleep, with their eyes closed, and standing on their head. This is exactly what we want for children with SM when they approach the counter at McDonalds® and the clerk asks them what they would like, their response and the back-and-forth banter of ordering should be so ingrained and over- practiced that, despite their increasing level of anxiety (and therefore emotional arousal), they are simply programmed to respond without even thinking. This type of over-practice takes. . . a lot of practice. Role playing should be part of the child’s normal day. Children should be role-playing with parents, keyworkers, therapists, and others in preparation for social interactions. A good rule of thumb is that the more realistic the scenario, the more effective the role-play. For example, if the role-lay is in preparation for an upcoming presentation, it is wonderful to practice that presentation at home, in the car, and at a friend’s house. However, the most effective role-play might be in the classroom where the presentation will be given, at the microphone, and with the prompts that will be used in the actual presentation. Likewise, if a child is role-playing to ask a peer over for a play date, a role-play done on the playground (where they are planning to ask) and with another peer whom they already feel comfortable with is likely to be most effective.
其次，社交技能培训可以让您有机会在安全，舒适的环境中学习和练习社交互动。当教授新技能时，成人经常在孩子最初掌握技能时停止，然后期望孩子在每种情况下都能轻松利用这项新技能。 “过度学习”这个术语用于练习远远超出最新掌握的技能;过度学习可以提高技能的掌握和自动化程度。 Yerkes-Dodson法则预测即使在高觉醒状态下，过度学习也会显着增加行为的使用（Rohrer，2005）。用外行人的话来说，如果一个孩子将社会行为发挥到完全和完全掌握的程度，甚至超出无聊的程度，它就会变得自动化，因此可以在他们的睡眠中完成，闭着眼睛，站在他们的头上。这正是我们想要SM的孩子们在McDonalds®接近柜台时所需要的，并且店员问他们想要什么，他们的反应以及来回的嘲讽应该是如此根深蒂固和过度练习，尽管他们的焦虑程度越来越高（因此情绪激动），但他们只是在没有思考的情况下做出反应。这种过度练习需要。 。 。很多练习。角色扮演应该是孩子正常日子的一部分。儿童应该与父母，关键工作者，治疗师和其他人一起进行角色扮演，为社交互动做准备。一个好的经验法则是场景越真实，角色扮演越有效。例如，如果角色扮演正在为即将到来的演示做准备，那么在家里，车内和朋友家里练习演示是很棒的。但是，最有效的角色扮演可能是在演示文稿的教室，麦克风以及将在实际演示中使用的提示。同样地，如果一个孩子在角色扮演中向同伴询问一个游戏日期，那么在操场上（他们计划要求的地方）和他们已经感觉舒适的另一个同伴进行的角色扮演可能是最多的。有效。

Social stories also offer social skills training through a medium most children find entertaining— books, videos, and phone apps. A social story is a visual or written guide to a variety of social interactions, situations, or skills for which the child may need preparation. The goal of social stories is to provide accurate and understandable steps in a social situation, allowing the child to see the likely stages and outcomes of an experience prior to experiencing it themselves. There are many sites providing general social stories, such as Sandbox Learning (http://www.sandbox-learning.com/) or the Social Story® Creator and Library® app by Touch Autism. It is also easy and fun to create your own social stories by making a book with your child relating how a social interaction will take place.
社交故事还提供社交技能培训，通过大多数孩子找到娱乐的媒体 - 书籍，视频和电话应用程序。社交故事是对儿童可能需要准备的各种社交互动，情境或技能的视觉或书面指南。社交故事的目标是在社交场合提供准确且易于理解的步骤，让孩子在体验之前了解体验的可能阶段和结果。有许多网站提供一般社交故事，例如Sandbox Learning（http://www.sandbox-learning.com/）或Touch Autism的SocialMonsus®Creator和Library®应用程序。通过与孩子一起制作关于如何进行社交互动的书来创建自己的社交故事也很容易和有趣。

PREDICTABILITY AND CONTROL
Humans feel anxiety because of a lack of predictability and a feeling of a lack of control. If something is under your control and you know exactly what will happen, you are not worried or stressed about it. We only worry when we do not feel in control or do not know what will happen next.
Children with selective mutism also desire predictability and control. Certain things cannot be completely controlled, such as the social responses children might receive from peers when they speak (although we can try to remind peers of the appropriate response when speech occurs). However, the more control and predictability we can provide to a child with selective mutism, the more the child will feel a reduction in anxiety and a feeling of mastery. For example:
Be consistent. I cannot highlight enough the importance of being consistent with anxious children. Consistency takes many forms:
可预测性和控制
由于缺乏可预测性和缺乏控制感，人类感到焦虑。如果某些东西在您的控制之下并且您确切知道将会发生什么，那么您并不担心或不会对此感到担忧。当我们感觉不到控制或者不知道接下来会发生什么时，我们才会担心。
选择性缄默症的儿童也需要可预测性和控制力。某些事情无法完全控制，例如孩子们说话时孩子们可能从同龄人那里得到的社会反应（尽管我们可以尝试在发言时提醒同伴适当的反应）。然而，我们可以为有选择性缄默症的孩子提供更多的控制和可预测性，孩子会越多地感到焦虑减少和掌握感。例如：
始终如一。我无法强调与焦虑的孩子保持一致的重要性。一致性有多种形式：

• Be consistent and predictable in your intervention. Kids should understand the next steps, the overall goal of getting braver, and the strategies that will be used. My sessions always run in the exact same manner—I am very predictable. The activity might be different, and the goal changes from session to session, but the child knows how long the meeting will last, what sorts of steps we will be working on, and that I will never move too quickly for them.
• Be consistent with your discipline and expectations. I strongly believe that children with selective mutism should not be given a “pass” on unacceptable behavior. Many teachers tell me that they allow the child with SM to get away with not following the rules of the classroom because they don’t want to upset him or her. For example, a teacher recently told me that a patient of mine had been blatantly copying off of another student in the classroom, right under the eyes of the teacher. She knew it was going on, and had reminded the class as a whole of the rules, but he had not stopped and she had done nothing about it because she was afraid of his reaction. Of course we must first make sure that there is nothing else prohibiting the child from doing his own work (i.e., Does he have a learning disorder and not understand? Was there a lack of understanding of the directions, but he could not ask for clarification so he was leaning over to determine what he should be doing?). We considered all of these possibilities and came to the conclusion that he was simply cheating. I gave permission to the teacher to tell him in no uncertain terms that cheating would no longer be accepted, and he immediately stopped. Children with SM must be held to the same behavioral expectations as peers, assuming that the behavior is not speech-related.
•在干预中保持一致和可预测。孩子们应该了解接下来的步骤，勇敢的总体目标以及将要使用的策略。我的会话总是以完全相同的方式运行 - 我非常容易预测。活动可能会有所不同，目标会话会话也会发生变化，但是孩子知道会议将持续多长时间，我们将采取哪些步骤，以及我永远不会为他们提速过快。
•与您的纪律和期望保持一致。我坚信，选择性缄默症的孩子不应该对不可接受的行为给予“通过”。许多老师告诉我，他们允许有SM的孩子逃脱不遵守课堂规则，因为他们不想让他或她不高兴。例如，一位老师最近告诉我，我的一名病人在教室的眼睛下公然抄袭了另一名学生。她知道它正在发生，并提醒整个班级的规则，但他没有停止，她没有做任何事情，因为她害怕他的反应。当然，我们必须首先确保没有别的东西禁止孩子做自己的工作（即，他是否有学习障碍而不理解？是否缺乏对方向的理解，但他无法要求澄清所以他倾向于确定他应该做什么？）。我们考虑了所有这些可能性，并得出结论他只是在作弊。我允许老师毫不含糊地告诉他，作弊将不再被接受，他立即停止了。 SM的儿童必须与同龄人保持相同的行为期望，假设行为与言语无关。

• Be consistent in the classroom. Children with SM tend to enjoy visual schedules. If there is going to be a significant change in the day, let them know the change and how that will impact them. If possible, keep their school day consistent and predictable.
•在课堂上保持一致。患有SM的儿童倾向于享受视觉时间表。如果当天会发生重大变化，请让他们知道变化以及影响他们的方式。如果可能的话，保持他们的学校日一致和可预测。

• Be consistent at home. Kids need a predictable daily schedule, predictable bedtimes, predictable routines, and predictable responses from parents. Children with anxiety thrive on predictability and consistency in the home. I know how difficult it can be to stay predictable—life throws curveballs in terms of scheduling, parents are tired and are not always consistent with discipline approaches, and activities sometimes allow kids to stay up much later than they should. I understand that life can be chaotic, but be as predictable as possible.
•在家里保持一致。孩子们需要一个可预测的日常安排，可预测的就寝时​​间，可预测的例行程序以及来自父母的可预测的回答。患有焦虑症的儿童在家中的可预测性和一致性上茁壮成长。我知道在日程安排方面保持可预测的生活是多么困难，父母感到厌倦并且并不总是与纪律方法保持一致，而且活动有时会让孩子们比他们应该更晚地熬夜。我知道生活可能是混乱的，但尽可能可预测。

• Give the child some control over their intervention. We learn as parents that kids need to have a sense of control in their daily lives, such as picking out their own clothing and deciding what they want to drink with dinner. We quickly learn to give them choices that we as adults are equally comfortable with; in that way, both the child and adult can be happy with the outcome. The same strategy can be used in behavioral intervention. For example, when I move to the step of blowing air, I often give children several choices of how we can practice blowing air (i.e., “We are going to practice blowing air, and we could use a balloon, a pinwheel, or a candle— which would you like to use to practice?”). I am equally comfortable with all of those options, but I am giving the child the ability to decide what type of practice we will do. At the step of making sounds, I may put letters of the alphabet on cards and allow the child to choose which sounds to start with. Eventually we will do all of the sounds, but it gives the child a sense of control over the progression. When it is time to speak to someone new or use their voice in a new setting, I give many choices of people or places and allow the child to pick. I do not ask the child if they would like to blow air, or if they would like to talk to someone new, because I can almost guarantee what the answer will be. Instead, I give several acceptable options. 
•让孩子控制他们的干预。我们作为父母学习，孩子们需要在日常生活中有一种控制感，比如挑选自己的衣服，决定他们想要在晚餐时喝什么。我们很快就会学会给予他们成年人同样舒适的选择;通过这种方式，孩子和成人都可以对结果感到满意。相同的策略可用于行为干预。例如，当我转向吹气的步骤时，我经常给孩子们选择如何练习吹空气（即“我们要练习吹空气，我们可以使用气球，风车或者蜡烛 - 你想用它练习吗？“）。我对所有这些选择同样感到满意，但我让孩子有能力决定我们将要做什么类型的练习。在发出声音的步骤中，我可以在卡片上放置字母，让孩子选择开始的声音。最终我们会做所有的声音，但它会让孩子对进展有一种控制感。当是时候与新人交谈或在新环境中使用他们的声音时，我会给出很多人或地方的选择并让孩子选择。我不会问孩子他们是否想要吹气，或者他们是否愿意与新人交谈，因为我几乎可以保证答案是什么。相反，我给出了几个可接受的选项。

THE ART OF RELAXING
Relaxation training is a common behavioral intervention for anxiety, and training children with selective mutism how to relax their bodies and minds is valuable. Typically, teaching relaxation training at the start of the intervention proves to be difficult, since relaxation training generally includes deep breathing (which may be anxiety-provoking when children are beginning treatment with a novel adult). Thus, I either train parents on how to teach their child to relax at home or I wait until the child begins to feel comfortable with me in the clinic before I begin relaxation training.
Common characteristics of children with SM include, 1) becoming easily aroused in social or public situations; 2) stiff, awkward body postures due to anxiety; and, 3) difficulty returning to baseline. Progressive muscle relaxation, along with mindfulness training (i.e., training in the awareness of thoughts, feelings, and physiological responses) and diaphragmatic breathing helps teach body awareness and awareness of breathing and the senses. Often, children with SM are extremely guarded with their body movements and are too embarrassed to participate in relaxation strategies with a therapist. Working first on mindfulness, including mindful listening, mindful observing, and mindful touching can be less anxiety-provoking and therefore a good place to start. The MindUP Curriculum by the Hawn Foundation outlines activities that can be used to teach mindfulness to any age group.
When a child becomes more comfortable in the clinic, progressive muscle relaxation and diaphragmatic breathing can be taught through a variety of methods. Scripts are available for progressive muscle relaxation; these scripts walk children verbally through the tensing and relaxing of their major muscle groups. I Can Relax! by Donna Pincus and Still Quiet Place: Mindfulness for Young Children by Amy Salzman provides sound effects and music with a narrator who leads the child through muscle relaxation and visualization.
放松的艺术
放松训练是对焦虑的常见行为干预，并且训练有选择性缄默症的儿童如何放松自己的身体和心灵是有价值的。通常，在干预开始时教授放松训练证明是困难的，因为放松训练通常包括深呼吸（当儿童开始用新成人治疗时可能引起焦虑）。因此，我或者培训父母如何教他们的孩子在家里放松，或者等到孩子在我开始放松训练之前开始对我感到舒服。
SM儿童的共同特征包括：1）在社交或公共场合容易引起; 2）因焦虑而僵硬，笨拙的身体姿势; 3）难以返回基线。渐进式肌肉放松，以及正念训练（即，对思想，感觉和生理反应的意识训练）和膈肌呼吸有助于教导身体意识和呼吸和感官意识。通常情况下，SM患儿的身体动作受到极大的保护，并且过于尴尬，无法与治疗师一起参与放松策略。首先注意正念，包括有意识的倾听，有意识的观察和有意识的触摸可以减少引起焦虑，因此是一个开始的好地方。霍恩基金会的MindUP课程概述了可用于教授任何年龄组的正念的活动。
当孩子在诊所变得更加舒适时，可以通过各种方法教授渐进性肌肉松弛和膈肌呼吸。脚本可用于渐进式肌肉放松;这些剧本通过对主要肌肉群的紧张和放松来口头表达儿童。我可以放松！作者：Donna Pincus和静谧的地方：Amy Salzman为幼儿正念提供声音效果和音乐，并通过肌肉放松和可视化引导孩子的叙述者。

An example of a progressive muscle relaxation script might include (Adapted from Koeppen, 1974):
PROGRESSIVE MUSCLE RELAXATION SCRIPT “Today we’re going to practice some special kinds of exercises called relaxation exercises. These exercises help you to learn how to relax when you’re feeling uptight and help you get rid of those butterflies-in-your-stomach kinds of feelings. They’re also kind of neat because you can learn how to do some of them without anyone really noticing.
In order for you to get the best feelings from these exercises, there are some rules you must follow. First, you need to do exactly what I say, even if it seems kind of silly. Second, you must try hard to do what I say. Third, you must pay attention to your body. Throughout these exercises, pay attention to how your muscles feel when they are tight and when they are loose and relaxed. And fourth, you must practice. The more you practice, the more relaxed you can get. Do you have any questions?
Are you ready to begin? Okay, first, get as comfortable as you can in your chair. Sit back, get both feet on the floor, and just let your arms hang loose. That’s fine. Now close your eyes and try to keep them closed as we practice. Remember to follow my instructions very carefully, try hard, and pay attention to your body. Here we go.”

渐进式肌肉放松脚本的一个例子可能包括（改编自Koeppen，1974）：

渐进式肌肉放松脚本“今天我们要练习一些叫做放松练习的特殊练习。这些练习可以帮助你学习如何放松，当你感到紧张，并帮助你摆脱那些蝴蝶在你胃里的感觉。他们也很整洁，因为你可以学习如何做一些没有人真正注意到的。
为了让您从这些练习中获得最佳感受，您必须遵循一些规则。首先，你需要完全按照我说的做，即使它看起来有点傻。其次，你必须努力做我说的话。第三，你必须注意你的身体。在这些练习中，要注意肌肉在紧身时以及松弛和放松时的肌肉感受。第四，你必须练习。练习越多，你就越放松。你有任何问题吗？
你准备好开始吗？好的，首先，尽量让你坐在椅子上。坐下来，双脚放在地板上，然后让你的手臂松开。没关系。现在闭上眼睛，试着在练习时让它们闭合。记得要非常小心地遵循我的指示，努力，并注意你的身体。开始了。”

Pretend you have a whole lemon in your left hand. Now squeeze it hard. Try to squeeze all the juice out. Feel the tightness in your hand and arm as you squeeze. Now drop the lemon. Notice how your muscles feel when they are relaxed. Take another lemon and squeeze. Try to squeeze this one harder than you did the first one. That’s right. Real hard. Now drop the lemon and relax. See how much better your hand and arm feel when they are relaxed. Once again, take a lemon in your left hand and squeeze all the juice out. Don’t leave a single drop. Squeeze hard. Good. Now relax and let the lemon fall from your hand. (Repeat the process for the right hand and arm.)
假装左手拿着一整个柠檬。现在用力挤压它。尽量挤出所有的果汁。当你挤压时，感觉手和手臂的紧绷感。现在放下柠檬。注意放松时肌肉的感觉。拿另一个柠檬挤压。尝试比第一个更难挤压这个。那就对了。真的很难。现在放下柠檬放松一下。看看放松时手和手臂的感觉有多好。再次，用左手拿柠檬，挤出所有的果汁。不要留下一滴。挤得很厉害。好。现在放松，让柠檬从你手中掉下来。 （重复右手和手臂的过程。）

Pretend you are a furry, lazy cat. You want to stretch. Stretch your arms out in front of you. Raise them up high over your head. Way back. Feel the pull in your shoulders. Stretch higher. Now just let your arms drop back to your side. Okay, let’s stretch again. Stretch your arms out in front of you. Raise them over your head. Pull them back, way back. Pull hard. Now let them drop quickly. Good. Notice how your shoulders feel more relaxed. This time let’s have a great big stretch. Try to touch the ceiling. Stretch your arms way out in front of you. Raise them way up high over your head. Push them way, way back. Notice the tension and pull in your arms and shoulders. Hold tight, now. Great. Let them drop very quickly and feel how good it is to be relaxed. It feels good and warm and lazy.
假装你是一只毛茸茸的懒猫。你想伸展。伸展双臂在你面前。将它们抬高到头顶。回来了。感受肩膀的拉力。伸展得更高。现在让你的手臂回到你身边。好的，我们再来一次。伸展双臂在你面前。抬起头来。向后拉回来。拉硬了。现在让他们迅速下降。好。注意你的肩膀感觉更放松。这一次让我们有一个很大的延伸。试着触摸天花板。在你面前伸展双臂。把它们提升到你的头顶。回过头来推它们。注意张力并拉动你的手臂和肩膀。紧紧抓住，现在。大。让他们快速下降，感受放松是多么美好。它感觉良好，温暖和懒惰。

Now pretend you have a giant jawbreaker bubble gum in your mouth. It’s very hard to chew. Bite down on it. Hard. Let your neck muscles help you. Now relax. Just let your jaw hang loose. Notice that how good it feels just to let your jaw drop. Okay, let’s tackle that jawbreaker again now. Bite down. Hard. Try to squeeze it out between your teeth. That’s good. You’re really tearing that gum up. Now relax again. It feels good just to let go and not have to fight that bubble gum. Okay, one more time. Bite down. Hard as you can. Oh, you’re really working hard. Good. Now relax. Try to relax your whole body. Let yourself go as loose as you can.
现在假装你口中有一个巨大的破口泡泡糖。这很难咀嚼。咬下它。硬。让你的颈部肌肉帮助你。现在放松一下只是让你的下巴松动。注意让你的下巴掉下来感觉有多好。好的，让我们现在再次解决这个令人伤心的问题。咬下来。硬。试着在牙齿之间挤出来。那很好。你真的撕裂了那个口香糖。现在再放松一下。只是放手而不必打泡泡糖感觉很好。好的，还有一次。咬下来。尽你所能。哦，你真的很努力。好。现在放松一下尽量放松你的全身。让自己尽可能地松散。

Here comes a pesky old fly. He has landed on your nose. Try to get him off without using your hands. That’s right, wrinkle up your nose. Make as many wrinkles in your nose as you can. Scrunch your nose up real hard. Good. You’ve chased him away. Now you can relax your nose. Oops, here he comes back again. Right back in the middle of your nose. Wrinkle up your nose again. Shoo him off. Wrinkle it up hard. Hold it just as tight as you can. Okay, he flew away. You can relax your face. Notice that when you scrunch up your nose, your cheeks and your mouth and your forehead and your eyes all help you, and they get tight too. So when you relax your nose, your whole body relaxes too, and that feels good. Oh-oh. This time that old fly has come back, but this time he’s on your forehead. Make lots of wrinkles. Try to catch him between all those wrinkles. Hold it tight, now. Okay, you can let go. He’s gone for good. Now you can just relax. Let your face go smooth, no wrinkles anywhere. Your face feels nice and smooth and relaxed.
这是一个讨厌的老苍蝇。他落在了你的鼻子上。试着不用你的双手让他离开。没错，你的鼻子皱了起来。尽可能多地在鼻子上留下皱纹。真的很努力地抬起你的鼻子。好。你把他赶走了。现在你可以放松你的鼻子。哎呀，他又来了。回到你的鼻子中间。再次皱起鼻子。把他赶走皱得很厉害。尽量紧紧抓住它。好的，他飞走了。你可以放松你的脸。请注意，当你揉鼻子时，你的脸颊和嘴巴，前额和眼睛都会帮助你，而且它们也会紧张。因此，当你放松鼻子时，你的整个身体也会放松，感觉很好。哦，哦。这一次老苍蝇回来了，但这次他在你的额头上。皱纹很多。试着在所有皱纹之间抓住他。现在紧紧抓住它。好的，你可以放手。他已经走了。现在你可以放松一下。让你的脸变得光滑，任何地方都没有皱纹。你的脸感觉美丽，光滑，放松。
Hey. Here comes a cute baby elephant. But he’s not watching where he’s going. He doesn’t see you lying in the grass, and he’s about to step on your stomach. Don’t move. You don’t have time to get out of the way. Just get ready for him. Make your stomach very hard. Tighten up your stomach muscles real tight. Hold it. It looks like he is going the other way. You can relax now. Let your stomach go soft. Let it be as relaxed as you can. That feels so much better. Oops, he’s coming this way again. Get Ready. Tighten up your stomach. Make your stomach into a rock. Okay, he’s moving away again. You can relax now. Kind of settle down, get comfortable, and relax. Notice the difference between a tight stomach and a relaxed one. That’s how we want to feel—nice and loose and relaxed. You won’t believe this, but this time he’s coming your way and no turning around. He’s headed straight for you. Tighten up. Here he comes. This is really it. You’ve got to hold on tight. He’s stepping on you. He’s stepped over you. Now he’s gone for good. You can relax completely. You’re safe. Everything is okay, and you can feel nice and relaxed.
嘿。这是一个可爱的小象。但他并不在意他要去的地方。他没有看到你躺在草地上，他正要踩到你的肚子。别动。你没有时间摆脱困境。为他做好准备让你的胃非常坚硬。紧紧收紧你的腹部肌肉。拿住。看起来他正在走另一条路。你现在可以放松一下。让你的胃变软。让它尽可能放松。感觉好多了。哎呀，他又来了。做好准备。收紧你的胃。让你的胃成为一块石头。好的，他又搬走了。你现在可以放松一下。有点安定下来，舒服，放松。注意紧张的胃和放松的胃之间的区别。这就是我们想要的感觉 - 好看，宽松和放松。你不会相信这一点，但这一次他是你的方式，没有转身。他直奔你。勒紧，加强。他来了。这是真的。你必须紧紧抓住。他踩着你。他踩到了你。现在他已经走了。你可以完全放松。你安全了。一切都很好，你可以感觉良好和放松。

This time imagine that you want to squeeze through a narrow fence and the boards have splinters on them. You’ll have to make yourself very skinny if you’re going to make it through. Suck your stomach in. Try to squeeze it up against your backbone. Try to be skinny as you can. You’ve got to be skinny now. Just relax and feel your stomach being warm and loose. Okay, let’s try to get through that fence now. Squeeze up your stomach. Make it touch your backbone. Get it real small and tight. Get it as skinny as you can. Hold tight, now. You’ve got to squeeze through. You got through that narrow little fence and no splinters. You can relax now. Settle back and let your stomach come back out where it belongs. You can feel really good now. You’ve done fine.
这一次想象你想挤过一个狭窄的栅栏，板上有碎片。如果你要完成它，你必须让自己变得非常瘦。吮吸你的胃。尝试将它挤在你的骨干上。尽量做到瘦。你现在必须要瘦。放松一下，感觉肚子温暖而松散。好的，我们现在试着通过那个围栏。挤压你的胃。让它触及你的脊梁。让它真实小而紧。尽可能地让它变瘦。紧紧抓住，现在。你必须挤过去。你穿过狭窄的小篱笆，没有碎片。你现在可以放松一下。安顿回来，让你的胃回到它所属的地方。你现在感觉很好。你做得很好。

Now pretend that you are standing barefoot in a big, fat mud puddle. Squish your toes down deep into the mud. Try to get your feet down to the bottom of the mud puddle. You’ll probably need your legs to help you push. Push down, spread your toes apart, feel the mud squish up between your toes. Now step out of the mud puddle. Relax your feet. Let your toes go loose and feel how nice that it feels to be relaxed. Back into the mud puddle. Squish your toes down. Let your leg muscles help push your feet down. Push your feet. Hard. Try to squeeze that puddle dry. Okay. Come back out now. Relax your feet, relax your legs, relax your toes. It feels so good to be relaxed. No tenseness anywhere. You feel kind of warm and tingly.
现在假装你赤脚站在一个大的深的泥泞水坑里。把你的脚趾深深地塞进泥里。尽量让你的脚踏到泥坑的底部。你可能需要你的腿来帮助你推动。向下推，将脚趾分开，感觉脚趾间的泥浆挤压。现在走出泥坑。放松你的脚。让你的脚趾松弛，感觉放松的感觉有多好。回到泥泞的水坑里。压下你的脚趾。让你的腿部肌肉帮助你的脚向下推。推你的脚。硬。尽量挤干水坑。好的。现在回来吧。放松双脚，放松双腿，放松脚趾。放松感觉真好。任何地方都没有紧张感。你觉得有点温暖和刺激。

Stay as relaxed as you can. Let your whole body go limp and feel all your muscles relaxed. In a few minutes I will ask you to open your eyes, and that will be the end of this practice session. As you go through the day, remember how good it feels to be relaxed. Sometimes you have to make yourself tighter before you can be relaxed, just as we did in these exercises. Practice these exercises everyday to get more and more relaxed. A good time to practice is at night, after you have gone to bed and the lights are out and you won’t be disturbed. It will help you get to sleep. Then, when you are really a good relaxer, you can help yourself relax at school. Just remember the elephant, or the jaw breaker, or the mud puddle, and you can do our exercises and nobody will know. Today is a good day, and you are ready to feel very relaxed. You’ve worked hard and it feels good to work hard. Very slowly, now, open your eyes and wiggle your muscles around a little. Very good. You’ve done a good job. You’re going to be a super relaxer.
尽可能保持放松。让你的整个身体跛行，让你的肌肉放松。几分钟后，我会请你睁开眼睛，这将是本练习课程的结束。当你度过这一天时，请记住放松的感觉。有时你必须在放松之前让自己变得更紧，就像我们在这些练习中所做的那样。每天练习这些练习，以获得越来越多的放松。练习的好时机是晚上，在你上床睡觉后灯光熄灭你不会被打扰。它会帮助你入睡。然后，当你真的是一个很好的放松者，你可以帮助自己在学校放松。只要记住大象，或下巴破碎者，或泥水坑，你可以做我们的练习，没有人会知道。今天是美好的一天，你准备好感到非常放松。你努力工作，努力工作感觉很好。非常缓慢，现在，睁开眼睛，稍微摆动你的肌肉。很好。你做得很好。你将成为一个超级放松者。

Apps are also available for bodily self-awareness and relaxation, including Cardiograph (an app measuring heart rate through the iPhone) and BellyBio® (interactive breathing through biofeedback). Children tend to find these apps fun and engaging, and it keeps them interested in the relaxation process. Biodots® (www.biodots.net) are also enjoyable additions to relaxation training. Biodots are small stickers which gauge skin temperature (a common measurement of physiological stress and anxiety) and change colors accordingly. After teaching children how to relax, they are sent home with the project of practicing relaxation, since skills cannot be used in the midst of stress unless they are practiced frequently. Parents and children log their heart rate and Biodot® color before and after relaxation in order to observe change through relaxation.
应用程序还可用于身体自我意识和放松，包括心电图（一种通过iPhone测量心率的应用程序）和BellyBio®（通过生物反馈进行交互式呼吸）。孩子们倾向于发现这些应用程序既有趣又吸引人，并且让他们对放松过程感兴趣。 Biodots®（www.biodots.net）也是放松训练的有趣补充。 Biodots是小贴纸，用于测量皮肤温度（生理压力和焦虑的常见测量）并相应地改变颜色。在教孩子们如何放松之后，他们被送回家进行放松练习的项目，因为技能不能在压力中使用，除非他们经常练习。父母和孩子在放松前后记录他们的心率和Biodot®颜色，以便通过放松观察变化。

Relaxation Log
Date Practiced Heart Rate Before? Color Before? Heart Rate After? Color After?
放松记录
实施日期	之前心率？		之前的颜色？	过后心率？		过后颜色？

CONCLUSION
Physicians, psychologists, teachers, and others constantly sing the praises of early intervention for a multitude of developmental and psychological disorders in childhood. Early intervention of special needs can improve outcomes, lessen the effects of the condition, and teach others to support the child and family in a successful manner. Too frequently children with selective mutism do not receive early intervention. The most common reasons include:
• A lag in time between observation of an issue (i.e., the difficulty speaking in public) and diagnosis/intervention. If you are reading this book, you are better prepared to help curb this delay (congratulations). Please consider helping others find out about selective mutism by educating your school staff, pediatrician, family, and friends. Send out informational brochures. Talk to others about your experience. Spread awareness.
• Difficulty finding specialists who can help. This is a particularly difficult issue, because many psychologists still do not know enough about selective mutism. Look specifically for a psychologist with experience treating kids with anxiety using behavioral therapy, or visit www.selectivemutism.org, www.adaa.org, or www.abct.org to find appropriate referrals.
• Concerns about “labeling” the child. Trust me, the child knows that they do not talk. This is no secret and it is not a valid reason for continuing without intervention.
• Family members who are not supportive. Everyone has one—a family member who believes the child is “just fine” or thinks that all they need is more discipline in the home. One of the hardest parts about being a parent is making unpopular decisions with the knowledge that it will improve the child’s life in the long-run.
• Belief that the child will grow out of it. There are children with SM who improve significantly with time and maturity. And there are children who do not improve with time, and instead experience an increase in anxiety, a reduction in friends, and difficulty being successful in school. We do not know which group a given child will fall into— should we really roll the dice? Research demonstrates that the most important predictors of treatment success are the age of the child upon treatment, the duration of symptoms, and whether the children obtains behavioral intervention (Pionek Stone, 2002). We must intervene as soon as possible and effectively to produce the best outcomes in children and adolescents with selective mutism. The time is now.
结论
医生，心理学家，教师和其他人不断赞扬早期干预儿童时期的多种发育和心理障碍。特殊需求的早期干预可以改善结果，减轻病情的影响，并教导他人以成功的方式支持儿童和家庭。选择性缄默症的儿童经常不接受早期干预。最常见的原因包括：
•观察问题（即公开演讲的难度）与诊断/干预之间的时间滞后。如果您正在阅读本书，您可以更好地帮助遏制这种延迟（祝贺）。请考虑通过教育您的学校员工，儿科医生，家人和朋友来帮助其他人了解选择性缄默症。发出信息手册。与他人谈谈你的经历。传播意识。
•难以找到可以提供帮助的专家。这是一个特别棘手的问题，因为许多心理学家对选择性缄默症仍然知之甚少。专门寻找一位有使用行为疗法治疗焦虑症孩子的心理学家，或访问www.selectivemutism.org，www.adaa.org或www.abct.org寻找合适的推荐。
•关注“标记”孩子的问题。相信我，孩子知道他们不会说话。这不是秘密，也不是没有干预就继续下去的正当理由。
•不支持的家庭成员。每个人都有一个家庭成员，他们认为孩子“很好”，或者认为他们所需要的只是在家里更加自律。作为父母最困难的部分之一就是做出不受欢迎的决定，因为它知道从长远来看会改善孩子的生活。
•相信孩子会从中长大。有些SM患儿随着时间和成熟程度的提高而显着改善。并且有些孩子不会随着时间的推移而改善，反而会增加焦虑，减少朋友，并且难以在学校取得成功。我们不知道一个特定的孩子会陷入哪个群体 - 我们真的应该掷骰子吗？研究表明，治疗成功的最重要预测因素是治疗后儿童的年龄，症状的持续时间以及儿童是否获得行为干预（Pionek Stone，2002）。我们必须尽快进行干预，并有效地在选择性缄默症的儿童和青少年中产生最佳结果。就是现在。
TREATMENT FORMS AND HANDOUTS
治疗表格和讲义
DIAGNOSTIC INTERVIEW
Name: __________________________________________________ 
Date of Intake: _____________________________________ 
Date of Birth: ______________________________________ 
Age: _____________________________________________ 
Informants: _______________________________________ 
School: ___________________________________________
Special Education Certification:
Speech/Language Impaired (SLI) or Communication Impaired (CI)
Other Health Impaired (OHI)
Emotionally Impaired/Disabled (EI/ED)
Specific Learning Disability (SLD)
Autistic Impairment (AI)
Other Designation: ______________________________
Section 504 Plan
None and parents are not interested in pursuing
None but parents interested in pursuing
Current Services
Physical Therapy
Occupational Therapy
Social Work
Speech
Resource Room
Other: ______________________________________
Evaluation/Treatment History:
Previous Evaluations: ______________________________
Previous Treatment: _______________________________
Tutoring: ________________________________________
Medications (past/present): __________________________
Presenting Concerns: _______________________________
Educational History/Concerns: ________________________
Strengths:

Speaking Situations Assessment
At School (i.e., teacher, specials teachers, female peers, male peers, principal, other adults in the school)
How? (what type of communication—nonverbal, whispered, regular speech, etc.)
Where? (what location)
Who? (whom do they talk to)

In Public (i.e., waiters, clerks, librarians, extracurricular teachers/coaches)
How? (what type of communication—nonverbal, whispered, regular speech, etc.)
Where? (what location)
Who? (whom do they talk to)
To Extended Family and Family Friends (i.e., grandparents, aunts/uncles, cousins, friends, friend’s parents)
How? (what type of communication—nonverbal, whispered, regular speech, etc.)
Where? (what location)
Who? (whom do they talk to)

Medical History:
Prenatal/Neonatal:
Labor/Delivery:
Infancy/Early Childhood:
Recurrent Medical Problems:
Medications Used Chronically:
Hospitalizations/Surgeries:
Seizures/Head Injuries:
Review of Systems:


Developmental History:
Fine and Gross Motor: 
Language:
What is the primary language? 
Are other languages spoken at home? 
Articulation, Fluency, or Speech Difficulties: 
Social Skills:

Environment: 
Family Members:
Name 	Relation to Child 		Age 		Occupation 	Notes. . .

Parent’s Relationship: ______________________________

Family Mental Health History:
Stressors (i.e., Educational, health, financial, neighborhood, or family issues)
Therapy:
What changes do you hope intervention will lead to? 
What are you afraid will happen if presenting concerns are not addressed? 
How long do you think these changes will take?

诊断访谈
姓名：__________________________________________________
入学日期：_____________________________________
出​​生日期：______________________________________
年龄：_____________________________________________
举报人：_______________________________________
学校：___________________________________________

特殊教育认证：
言语/语言障碍（SLI）或沟通障碍（CI）
其他健康障碍者（OHI）
情绪受损/残疾（EI / ED）
特殊学习障碍（SLD）
自闭症损伤（AI）
其他指定：______________________________
第504节计划
没有，父母对追求不感兴趣
没有，但父母有兴趣追求

现有服务
物理疗法
职业治疗
社会工作
言语
资源室
其他：______________________________________

评估/治疗历史：
以前的评估：______________________________
以前的治疗：_______________________________
辅导：________________________________________
药物（过去/现在）：__________________________
提出疑虑：_______________________________
教育历史/关注：________________________
优势：________________________


讲话情况评估
在学校（即教师，特殊教师，女同事，男同事，校长，学校其他成年人）
1怎么样？ （什么类型的沟通 - 非语言，低声，常规讲话等）
2哪里？ （什么位置）
3谁？ （他们与谁交谈）

在公共场合（即服务员，文员，图书管理员，课外教师/教练）
1怎么样？ （什么类型的沟通 - 非语言，低声，常规讲话等）
2哪里？ （什么位置）
3谁？ （他们与谁交谈）

对大家庭和家庭朋友（即祖父母，阿姨/叔叔，堂兄弟，朋友，朋友）
父母）
1怎么样？ （什么类型的沟通 - 非语言，低声，常规讲话等）
2哪里？ （什么位置）
3谁？ （他们与谁交谈）


病史：
产前/新生儿：
劳动/交付：
婴儿期/幼儿期：
经常性医疗问题：
长期使用的药物：
住院/手术方式：
癫痫发作/头部受伤：

审查系统：


发展历史：
精细和大马达：
语言：
什么是主要语言？
在家里说其他语言吗？
清晰度，流利性或言语困难：
社交技能：

环境：
家庭成员：
姓名		与儿童关系		年龄		职业		说明的。 。

父母的关系：______________________________

家庭心理健康史：
压力源（即教育，健康，金融，社区或家庭问题）
治疗：
您希望干预会带来哪些变化？
如果没有解决问题，你会害怕会发生什么？
您认为这些变化需要多长时间？

STAGES OF SOCIAL OMMUNICATION COMFORT SCALE 

NON-COMMUNICATIVE
—neither non-verbal nor verbal. NO social engagement. 
STAGE 0—NO RESPONDING, NO INITIATING
 – Child stands motionless (stiff body language), expressionless, averts eye gaze, appears “frozen,” MUTE 
OR 
– Seemingly IGNORES person while interacting or speaking to other(s). MUTE towards others For communication to occur, Social Engagement must occur
COMMUNICATIVE  (Nonverbal and/or Verbal)*
*To advance from one stage of communication to the next, increasing social comfort needs to occur. 

STAGE 1—NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION: (NV) 
1A Responding—pointing, nodding, writing, sign language, gesturing, use of “objects” (e.g., whistles, bells, Non-voice augmentative device (e.g., communication boards/cards, symbols, photos) 
1B Initiating—getting someone’s attention via pointing, gesturing, writing, use of “objects” to get attention (e.g., whistles, bells, Non-voice augmentative device (e.g., communication boards/cards, symbols, photos)

STAGE 2—TRANSITION INTO VERBAL COMMUNICATION (TV) 
2A Responding—Via any sounds, (e.g., grunts, animal sounds, letter sounds, moans, etc.): Verbal Intermediary → or Whisper Buddy; Augmentative Device with sound, (e.g., simple message switch, multiple voice message device, tape recorder, video, etc.) 
2B Initiating—Getting someone’s attention via any sounds, (e.g., grunts, animal sounds, letter sounds, moans, etc.): Verbal Intermediary → or Whisper Buddy; Augmentative Device with sound, (e.g., simple message switch, multiple voice message device, tape recorder, video, etc) 

STAGE 3—VERBAL COMMUNICATION (VC) 
3A Responding—Approximate speech/direct speech (e.g., altered or made-up language, baby talk, reading / rehearsing script, soft whispering, speaking) 
3B Initiating—Approximate speech/direct speech (e.g., altered or made-up language, baby talk, reading/rehearsing script, soft whispering, speaking)

“Copyright© 2012 Dr. Elisa Shipon-Blum and Selective Mutism Anxiety Research and Treatment Center, Inc. (SMart Center), www.selectivemutismcenter.org. All rights reserved.”
“This material is part of Dr. Elisa Shipon-Blum’s Social Communication Anxiety Treatment → or S-CAT → and is used under license.”
社交沟通舒适度的阶段

无沟通 
 - 非言语或口头。没有社交参与。

阶段0-没有响应，没有启始
  - 孩子站立不动（僵硬的肢体语言），无表情，避免目光凝视，出现“冻结”，缄默
或者
 - 在与其他人互动或交谈时看似忽略旁人。对他人缄默。
为了进行沟通，必须进行社交参与

社交沟通（非语言和/或口头）*
*为了从一个阶段的沟通进入下一个阶段，需要增加社交舒适度。

阶段1-非语言沟通：（NV）
1A响应指向，点头，书写，手语，手势，使用“对象”（例如，口哨，铃铛，非语音增强装置（例如，通信板/卡，符号，照片）
1B启动 - 通过指点，手势，写作，使用“对象”引起注意（例如，口哨，铃声，非语音增强设备（例如，通信板/卡，符号，照片））来引起别人的注意

阶段2-转换为口头交流（TV）
2A响应 - 通过任何声音（例如，咕噜声，动物声音，字母声音，呻吟声等）：言语中介→或耳语好友;具有声音的增强设备（例如，简单的消息切换，多个语音消息设备，磁带录音机，视频等）
2B发起 - 通过任何声音引起某人的注意（例如，咕噜声，动物声，字母声，呻吟声等）：言语中介→或悄悄话;具有声音的增强设备（例如，简单的消息切换，多个语音消息设备，录音机，视频等）

阶段3-语言交流（VC）
3A回应 - 近似语音/直接言语（例如，改变或化妆语言，婴儿谈话，阅读/排练脚本，软耳语，口语）
3B发起/起始 - 近似语音/直接语音（例如，改变或化妆语言，婴儿谈话，阅读/排练脚本，软耳语，说话）

“版权所有©2012 Elisa Shipon-Blum博士和选择性突变焦虑研究与治疗中心，（SMart中心），www.selectivemutismcenter.org。版权所有。”
“这些材料是Elisa Shipon-Blum博士社会交流焦虑治疗→或S-CAT→的一部分，并且经许可使用。”


STRUCTURED BSERVATION SHEET
Directions: For each column, circle/check all that apply.


结构化的观察表
FUNCTIONAL BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS 
Structured Functional Behavior Analysis Selective Mutism—SCHOOL
Child:
Date:
Time of Assessment:
Behavior:
Response* Nonverbal Response Lack of Response Location**: Regular Classroom Specials Classroom
Outside/Recess
Library
Lunchroom
Immediate Antecedent: Peer-initiated Interaction
Adult-initiated Interaction Interaction initiated to group Child has need Child is socially motivated
Immediate Consequence: Redirected to enjoyable activity Saved*** Lack of Response Time No Response/Ignored Punitive Statement Interrupted Prompted to verbalize Response/Reciprocation***
Prompt
R+
Escape
Strat.
Pun.
Indicate: * Voiced or Whispered ** 1:1, Small Group (</= 5) or Large Group (>6) *** Peer or Adult
Total:



STIMULUS FADING PROCEDURE EXAMPLE
 
1. Goal is to get new communication partner (NCP) into room with child using appropriate speech. Parent or keyworker’s job is to keep child talking while the NCP enters through fun activities that encourage speech, forced-choice questions, and at least five-second latency to response. 
2. Parent/keyworker and child should have some time to “warm up” in the room, playing and talking alone with the door almost closed. During this time, full speech (not a quiet whisper) must be obtained consistently before a new individual begins fading in. (***If several sessions pass and the child cannot warm up to the point of consistent speech, intervention must shift to shaping). 
3. NCP begins fading into the room when the parent/keyworker has obtained an appropriate volume of consistent speech from the child. The NCP begins by simply opening the door and walking in front of the door, so as to make her presence known. The NCP should NOT respond in any way to what the child says or act as if they are attending to the child. 
4. The NCP should very slowly enter the room, as far away from the child as possible, and busy themselves (i.e., type on the computer, pick up the room, or do paperwork). If the child begins to discontinue speaking or shows other general signs of anxiety, slow the entrance down even more or just stay in the same position for several minutes until the anxiety is reduced and speech resumes. 
5. The NCP should slowly start making their way toward the child by finding things to do in closer proximity to the interaction, but should continue to pay no attention to the child. 
6. When the NCP is close to the interaction and the child has maintained speech, he or she can begin to silently attend to the interaction. 
7. If the child tolerates attention to their speech, the NCP can begin to reflect or respond to what the child is saying. For example, if the child tells the parent that they picked a blue card, the NCP could reflect, “Oh, you picked a blue card.” If the child tells the mother that he played his new videogame last night, the NCP could comment, “You played your new game—that sounds like fun.” 
8. When this seems comfortable and minimally anxiety-provoking, the NCP can begin peppering in occasional forced-choice questions. 
9. When the child is consistently responding to the NCP, the parent can begin to slowly fade out of the room, leaving the NCP and the child. This can be done using the above steps in reverse. It is important that the parent not fade faster than the child can manage. If significant anxiety is observed or if the child’s verbalizations considerably decrease, the parent should remain at the current location until comfort is re-established.
If the child ceases speech at any point during the stimulus fading, the NCP should stop moving toward the child/parent and wait for the parent to re-establish speech with the child. In the case that the parent is unable to re-establish speech in a few minutes, the NCP should move back a few steps toward the door, and again see if the parent is able to re-establish speech with the child. If the parents is still unable to re-establish speech, shaping may need to be considered in the place of stimulus fading as the initial intervention.
If the NCP is unable to complete all steps in one session, they could start outside of the room again but attempt to fade in more quickly. As the child’s anxiety will likely spontaneously return somewhat at the beginning of each session (although less and less will be present each time), the NCP should still be careful to be responsive to the anxiety.

刺激渐变程序示例
 
1.目标是让新的沟通伙伴（NCP）与孩子一起使用适当的演讲。家长或关键工作者的工作是让孩子在NCP通过鼓励言语，强制选择问题和至少5秒的响应延迟的有趣活动进入时进行交谈。
2.家长/关键工作者和孩子应该有一些时间在房间里“热身”，单独玩耍和谈话，门几乎关闭。在这段时间内，必须在新人开始消退之前始终获得完整的演讲（不是安静的低语）。（***如果几个课程通过，孩子不能热身到一致的讲话，干预必须转向塑造）。
3.当父母/关键工作者从孩子那里获得适当数量的一致语音时，NCP开始淡入房间。 NCP开始只需打开门并走在门前，以便让她知晓。 NCP不应以任何方式回应孩子说的话或表现好像他们正在照顾孩子一样。
4. NCP应该非常缓慢地进入房间，尽可能远离孩子，并且自己忙碌（即，在电脑上打字，拿起房间或做文书工作）。如果孩子开始停止说话或表现出其他一般的焦虑迹象，请将入口减慢甚至更多，或者只是停留在相同位置几分钟，直到焦虑减少并恢复讲话。
5. NCP应该通过在更接近互动时找到要做的事情慢慢开始向孩子开始，但是应该继续不关注孩子。
6.当NCP接近互动并且孩子保持言语时，他或她可以开始默默地参与互动。
7.如果孩子容忍注意他们的讲话，NCP可以开始反映或回应孩子说的话。例如，如果孩子告诉父母他们选择了蓝卡，NCP可以反映：“哦，你选了一张蓝卡。”如果孩子告诉母亲他昨晚播放了他的新视频游戏，NCP可以发表评论，“你玩过你的新游戏 - 听起来很有趣。”
8.当这看起来很舒服并且极其焦虑时，NCP可以在偶尔的强制选择问题中开始发挥作用。
9.当孩子一直回应NCP时，父母可以开始慢慢淡出房间，离开NCP和孩子。这可以使用上述步骤反过来完成。重要的是，父母不要比孩子能够管理的更快地消退。如果观察到明显的焦虑或者孩子的言语明显减少，父母应该留在当前位置，直到重新建立安慰。

如果孩子在刺激消退期间的任何时候停止发言，NCP应该停止向孩子/父母移动并等待父母与孩子重新建立讲话。如果父母在几分钟内无法重新建立语音，NCP应向后退几步，并再次查看父母是否能够与孩子重新建立语音。如果父母仍然无法重新建立言语，则可能需要考虑在刺激消退的地方进行整形作为初始干预。
如果NCP无法在一个会话中完成所有步骤，他们可以再次从房间外面开始，但尝试更快地淡入。由于孩子的焦虑可能会在每次开始时自发地有所回复（尽管每次都会越来越少），NCP仍然应该小心对焦虑做出反应。
COMMUNICATION LADDER HANDOUT
ਮਮਮਮਮਮਮ
PLAYDATE DATA SHEET
Classmate’s Name
Description of Speech Prior to Play
Other Comments: date (e.g., nonverbal, sounds, one word answers, etc.) Joe Smith Ben had never spoken to Joe prior to
the play date.
Description of Speech During/After
Spoken to Classmate’s
Number of Past Play dates With This Friend? Ben initiated by asking
No. 2 This was Ben’s first Joe questions during
play date with their play date.
speech in a full voice.

游戏约会数据表


PERSON BINGO
Have you ever been to Disneyworld? Do you own a dog? Can you speak another language? 
Are you the oldest child in your family? Do you like Mexican food? Do you like funny movies? Were you born in March? Have you lived in more than one house? Have you ever owned a fish?

个人BINGO
你去过迪士尼世界吗？你有狗吗？你会说另一种语言吗？
你是家里最大的孩子吗？你喜欢墨西哥菜吗？你喜欢搞笑电影吗？
你是三月出生的吗？你住过一个以上的房子吗？你有过鱼吗？
FAVORITES GAME
Favorite Name: __________ Names: __________ Names: __________ 
Movie 
Ice Cream Flavor 
Book 
Pizza Topping



最喜欢的游戏



EXAMPLE MISSION CARDS
Ask the nurse for a paperclip. Tell someone in your class that you like their outfit. 
out what your teacher did this weekend. Ask the teacher to borrow a pencil. 
Take this letter to the principal and ask him to mail it. Ask the secretary if there is any mail for your teacher today. 
Say “Hi” to your music teacher. Ask your teacher if you can use the bathroom.

示例任务卡
向护士要一张回形针。告诉你班上的某个人你喜欢他们的服装。
这个周末你的老师做了什么。请老师借一支铅笔。
把这封信带给校长并要求他邮寄。问秘书今天是否有任何邮件给你的老师。
对你的音乐老师说“嗨”。问你的老师你是否可以使用浴室。
SCRIPTED INITIATION SHEET
Task 					Date Completed
Good morning teacher.
goodbye.
May I have ______ please?
I need help with. . .
May I please go to the bathroom?
May I get a drink of water?
Thank you.
****Children tend to need 7-10 practices of each scripted statement before it becomes comfortable/less anxiety-provoking. Following each successful practice, they are rewarded with a sticker; after filling up the page they have earned a large prize. Two boxes are left blank to personalize to the child’s specific practice needs.


****儿童在变得舒适/不那么焦虑之前，每个脚本陈述往往需要7-10次的练习。每次成功练习后，都会获得贴纸奖励;填写满页面后，他们可获得大奖。两个方框留空，以满足个性化儿童的特定练习需求。
BRAVE Work Log

Date Environment Communication
Partner
Step on Ladder (mark all that apply)
Notes
3/13/14 Social
Worker’s office
Ms. Brandez
Jack did a great job. He spoke directly to both Ms. Brandez and Mr. Jones.
(keyworker) Mr. Jones (English teacher)
Date Environment Communication
Partner
Step on Ladder Notes
3/15/14 Grandma’s
house
Mom
Wow, Jack has come so far. Now he talks to Grandma as soon as she comes to the house!
Grandma Jackson
Date Environment Communication
Partner
Step on Ladder Notes
3/16/14 McDonalds clerk
Mom
Jack was hesitant to order, but was able to order in a whisper while looking at mom (but at a loud enough volume that the clerk could hear).
Date Environment Communication
Partner
Step on Ladder Notes
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Regular Volume of Voice
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Regular Volume of Voice
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Regular Volume of Voice
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Regular Volume of Voice
Initiation
Whispers
Nonverbals
Sounds
Whispers
Initiation
Nonverbals
Sounds
Whispers
Nonverbals
Sounds
Initiation
Nonverbals
Sounds
Whispers
Initiation
W
ORK
L
OG
(E
XAMPLE
L
OG
Date Environment Communication Partner Step on Ladder (mark all that apply) Notes
Regular Volume of Voice Date Environment Communication Partner Step on Ladder Notes
Regular Volume of Voice Date Environment Communication Partner Step on Ladder Notes
Regular Volume of Voice Date Environment Communication Partner Step on Ladder Notes
B
RAVE
W
ORK
One word Response
Initiation
Whispers
Initiation
Nonverbals
Sounds
Whispers
Multiple Word Response
Initiation
Nonverbals
Sounds
Whispers
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Nonverbals
Sounds
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Nonverbals
Sounds
Whispers
One word Response
Multiple Word Response
Initiation
Regular Volume of Voice


UNDERSTANDING SELECTIVE MUTISM HANDOUT
Selective mutism is a childhood anxiety disorder characterized by a child’s ‘inability’ to speak in various social settings. These children are able to speak freely at home, and in settings where they are comfortable, secure and relaxed. Selective mutism is due to severe anxiety, not oppositional behavior directed towards school personnel—the lack of communication serves to reduce anxiety and protect the child from further anxiety-provoking social interactions. It is so important for teachers, school personnel, and other adults to remember that the child with selective mutism is not ‘being silent’ or barely whispering ‘on purpose,’ or trying to ‘control’ a situation. These children literally cannot speak.
The majority of selectively mute children have inhibited temperaments. When children who are selectively mute confront a social situation where they do not feel comfortable, they often become mute and possibly non-communicative. Some children may have great difficulty pointing/nodding or even mouthing words while others may be able to respond and initiate nonverbally with ease and ‘look’ completely relaxed.
理解选择性缄默症讲义
选择性缄默症是一种儿童焦虑症，其特征是儿童在各种社交环境中“不能”说话。这些孩子可以在家里自由发言，在舒适，安全和放松的环境中畅所欲言。选择性缄默症是由于严重的焦虑，而不是针对学校人员的反对行为 - 缺乏沟通有助于减少焦虑并保护儿童免受进一步引起焦虑的社交互动。对于教师，学校工作人员和其他成年人来说，记住选择性缄默症的孩子并非“保持沉默”或者“故意”或者试图“控制”某种情况，这一点非常重要。这些孩子实际上不会说话。
大多数选择性静音的孩子都抑制了性情。当有选择性地静音的孩子面对他们感到不舒服的社交场合时，他们经常变得沉默并且可能是非交际的。有些孩子可能很难指点/点头甚至嘴里说话，而其他孩子则可能能够轻松地响应和启动非语言并且“看起来”完全放松。

School is usually the most difficult place for children with selective mutism to be. What can an adult do to help the anxious child with selective mutism?
• Primarily, the adult should try to get to know the child in a completely unobtrusive and accepting manner. Visiting the child at home is often beneficial. There is certainly no better place for children to feel more comfortable then in their own home! Visiting the children on their own turf will certainly allow for a more comfortable way of getting to know each other.
• Be patient with the child. Although he/she may seem stubborn, it is believed that the silence or non-communicative behavior simply helps him avoid extremely high levels of discomfort and anxiety. The child is likely to be scared rather than angry or stubborn.
• Sometimes present questions in a multiple-choice format (e.g., “Would you rather play with Legos or Playdoh?”). If he/she does not answer, wait 5 seconds and ask the question again.
• Please be careful about describing the child as shy—this may seem like a kind response but it leads the child and others to believe that the behavior cannot change.
• Quietly praise the child and provide support when he uses forms of communication that involve reaching out and responding to others. Nonchalantly giving praise like “Thanks for letting me know” or “I’m glad you told me” is appropriate.
• Actively support the child’s inclusion and ensure peers do not interpret silence as
disinterest/rudeness.
Try to avoid:
• Guessing at what the child is telling you nonverbally. Spending a long time in nonverbal interactions may diminish the child’s motivation for using words at a later time.
• Pressuring, bribing, threatening, flattering, or cajoling the child into speaking.
• Completely removing opportunities for children speak—if children do not have any opportunity or reason to speak, they probably will not speak.
对于有选择性缄默症的孩子来说，学校通常是最困难的地方。成年人可以做些什么来帮助焦虑的孩子选择性缄默？
•成年人应该尽量以完全不引人注意和接受的方式了解孩子。在家里探望孩子通常是有益的。对于孩子来说，在自己的家中感觉更舒适当然没有比这更好的地方了！在他们自己的草坪上拜访孩子肯定会让他们更加舒适地相互了解。
•对孩子保持耐心。虽然他/她可能看起来很顽固，但人们认为沉默或非交际行为只会帮助他避免极度的不适和焦虑。孩子可能会害怕而不是生气或顽固。
•有时以多种选择格式呈现问题（例如，“您更愿意与乐高积木或Playdoh一起玩吗？”）。如果他/她没有回答，请等待5秒钟再次提问。
•请小心将孩子描述为害羞 - 这似乎是一种善意的反应，但它会引导孩子和其他人相信行为不会改变。
•在使用涉及接触和回应他人的沟通方式时，悄悄地赞扬孩子并提供支持。毫无疑问地给予赞美，比如“谢谢你让我知道”或“我很高兴你告诉我”是合适的。
•积极支持孩子的参与，并确保同伴不要将沉默解释为不感兴趣/粗鲁。
尽量避免：
•猜测孩子非语言地告诉你什么。花费很长时间进行非语言互动可能会降低孩子以后使用语言交流的动机。
•对孩子施压，贿赂，威胁，奉承或哄骗说话。
•彻底消除孩子说话的机会 - 如果孩子没有任何机会或理由说话，他们可能不会说话。

 SAMPLE SCHOOL LETTER
Letter Requesting Consideration of an Individualized Education Plan Everything between brackets should be customized. Be sure to edit content in order to reflect your child’s specific situation. Be sure to send a copy to the principal and/or school psychologist or counselor and keep a copy for yourself.
[Date] 
[School] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code]
To Whom it May Concern,
My child, [child’s name], is currently in [list program or grade] at [school name]. Given a recent diagnostic evaluation with [Dr’s Name] and a subsequent diagnosis of selective mutism, a specific anxiety disorder, I would like to meet with the special education team to discuss [his/her] current placement situation and to look at how we can modify [his/her] current goals and objectives to better fit [his/her] educational needs.
(Edit this paragraph to reflect your specific situation: My child is regressing. [He/she] is not benefiting from [his/her] current placement. I am concerned that [he/she] is unable to participate in oral presentations and group projects. If [he/she] is injured, [he/she] may not be able to indicate that [he/she] needs help.)
Children with Selective mutism need specific intervention plans in the school setting, including working with a “keyworker”—someone in the school setting who can practice “being brave” and encouraging speech with (child’s name). [Dr’s name] is happy to assist in setting up an intervention plan with this keyworker, as well as helping to develop accommodations in the classroom.
Please schedule a meeting as soon as possible so that we can discuss these issues and consider an accommodations and/or intervention plan. I would prefer being contacted with time options in advance so that the meeting can be scheduled at a mutually agreeable time and place.
I look forward to hearing from you within the next five school days.
Sincerely,
[Parent/Guardian Name] [Address] [City, State, Zip Code] [Phone Number]

示例学校信件
要求考虑个性化教育计划的信函应该定制括号内的所有内容。请务必编辑内容以反映您孩子的具体情况。务必将副本发送给校长和/或学校心理学家或辅导员，并为自己保留一份副本。
[日期]
[学校]
[地址]
[城市，州，邮政编码]
致相关人士，
我的孩子[孩子的名字]目前在[学校名称]的[列表课程或成绩]。鉴于最近对[博士的名字]的诊断评估和随后的选择性缄默症，一种特定的焦虑症的诊断，我想与特殊教育团队会面，讨论[他/她]当前的安置情况，并看看我们如何能够修改[他/她]目前的目标和目标，以更好地满足[他/她]的教育需求。
（编辑本段以反映您的具体情况：我的孩子正在倒退。[他/她]没有从[他/她]目前的安置中受益。我担心[他/她]无法参加口头报告和小组如果[他/她]受伤，[他/她]可能无法表明[他/她]需要帮助。）
选择性缄默症的儿童需要在学校环境中采取具体的干预计划，包括与“关键工作者”一起工作 - 在学校环境中的某些人可以练习“勇敢”并鼓励用（孩子的名字）讲话。 [博士的名字]很乐意协助与这位关键工作者制定干预计划，并帮助在课堂上开发住宿。
请尽快安排会议，以便我们讨论这些问题并考虑住宿和/或干预计划。我希望提前与时间选项联系，以便可以在双方同意的时间和地点安排会议。
我期待在接下来的五个上学日内收到你的来信。
此致
[家长/监护人姓名]
 [地址] [市，州，邮政编码] 
[电话号码]

SAMPLE SELECTIVE MUTISM INTERVENTION AND ACCOMMODATION PLAN RECOMMENDATIONS
(*Not all listed interventions and accommodations are appropriate for every child, thus, interventions should be chosen based on the needs of the child and developed in conjunction with the intervention team with the goal of meeting those needs.)
示例 选择性缄默症的干预和帮助计划建议
（*并非所有列出的干预措施和帮助都适合每个儿童，因此，应根据儿童的需求选择干预措施，并与干预小组一起制定干预措施，以满足这些需求。）

1. [Student] may benefit from working in individualized sessions with a “keyworker” (a school- based professional in charge of practicing “brave work” with the child, generalizing to all school environments, and communicating with other involved team members). These sessions should consist of behavioral interventions, using shaping and stimulus fading procedures to reduce the child’s anxiety and increase communication at a slow, steady pace. More information about the development of an intervention plan within the school can be found in Selective Mutism by Aimee Kotrba, Ph.D. This intervention must begin one-on-one in a closed-office setting, and once speech has been obtained the child and keyworker can begin working in different settings and including an increasing number of individuals. 
1. [学生]可以通过与“关键工作者”（一名负责与孩子一起实施“勇敢工作”的学校专业人员，向所有学校环境推广，以及与其他相关团队成员沟通）的个性化会议中受益。这些会议应该包括行为干预，使用塑形和刺激衰退程序来减少孩子的焦虑，并以缓慢，稳定的速度增加沟通。关于在学校内制定干预计划的更多信息可以在Aimee Kotrba博士的选择性突变中找到。这种干预必须在封闭的办公环境中一对一地开始，一旦获得言论，孩子和关键工作者就可以开始在不同的环境中工作，包括越来越多的个人。

2. [Student] should at first be encouraged to increase communication and participate in the classroom and socially, even if that communication is nonverbal at first. Eventually, attempts should be made to reinforce and attend to only verbal language, so as to extinguish the use of nonverbal communication. 
2. [学生]首先应该被鼓励增加沟通，参与课堂和社交活动，即使这种沟通最初是非语言的。最终，应该尝试加强和只关注口头语言，以便消除非语言交流的使用。

3. Allow [student] extra time to respond to questions. At least five seconds should be provided after every communication prompt or question, in order to all [student] an opportunity to answer. 
3.让[学生]有更多时间回答问题。每次通讯提示或问题后至少应提供五秒钟，以便所有[学生]有机会回答。

4. Take care not to make too much direct eye contact, as this can increase [student’s] anxiety. 
4.注意不要过多地直接接触眼睛，因为这会增加[学生]的焦虑。

5. [Student] should be given alternative ways of completing oral assignments if necessary, including written projects, audio/videotaping the child presenting at home, allowing a peer or the teacher to present the written work while the child points to a poster board, etc. 
5.如有必要，[学生]应有其他方式完成口头作业，包括书面项目，在家中录制儿童的录音/录像，允许同伴或教师在孩子指向海报板时提交书面作业，等等

6. The classroom teacher will provide nonverbal assessments. 
6.课堂教师将提供非语言评估。

7. [Student] should never be punished and/or criticized, and should not receive reduced grades because of the lack of speech. 
7. [学生]不应该受到惩罚和/或批评，并且由于缺乏言论，不应该得到降低的分数。

8. When the child does communicate, no extra attention or overt praise should be given to the child, as this might increase anxiety. Matter-of-fact praise (such as “Thanks for letting me know”) can be given nonchalantly. 
8.当孩子进行交流时，不应给予孩子额外的关注或公开表扬，因为这可能会增加焦虑。事实上的称赞（例如“感谢让我知道”）可以毫无顾忌地给予。

9. [Student] shall be permitted, if necessary, to take any standardized test outside of the regular classroom, either privately or in a small group, administered by the keyworker, in case [she/he] needs to ask a question or seek clarification. 
9.如果[她/他]需要提出问题或寻求，必要时，[学生]可以在普通教室外进行任何标准化测试，无论是私人还是小组，由主要工作人员管理。澄清。

10. Home/school communication will be available on a daily or weekly basis with both the classroom teacher and the “key worker.” It is recommended that this communication take the form of a “Brave Work Log” (as seen in ______________ by Aimee Kotrba, Ph.D.). Copies can be placed in a 3-ring binder and passed around to team members. All team members (e.g., teacher, keyworker, psychologist, parent) can record progress so as to maximize communication. 
10.家庭/学校的沟通将每天或每周与课堂教师和“关键工作者”一起提供。建议此沟通采取“勇敢的工作日志”的形式（如______________ Aimee所见） Kotrba，博士。副本可以放在一个3环活页夹中，并传递给团队成员。所有团队成员（例如，教师，键盘工作者，心理学家，家长）都可以记录进度以最大化沟通。

11. Assign [Student] a seat with a close friend on each side, close to the teacher, away from door. 
11.为[学生]分配一个座位，每侧都有一位亲密的朋友，靠近老师，远离门。

12. Assign [Student Name] a seat at lunch next to friends. 
12.分配[学生姓名]午餐时坐在朋友的旁边。

13. Assign scheduled times for bathroom breaks. Have [Student] and [her/his] buddy accompany each other to the bathroom. 
13.预定时间去厕所的。让[学生]和[她/他]的伙伴互相陪伴到厕所。

14. Prepare [Student] for changes in routine (e.g., substitute teachers) and special large group activities (e.g., substitutes, fire drills, schedule changes, field trips). All substitute teachers should be made aware of the child’s accommodations.
14.准备[学生]对例行日常出现的变更（例如代课教师）和特殊大型团体活动（例如替补，消防演习，时间表变更，实地考察）。所有代课教师都应该了解孩子的帮助计划。

15. All adults who come into contact with [Student] should be advised of the intervention plan (e.g., teacher, extras teachers, lunch personnel, office staff, etc.). 
15.应告知所有与[学生]接触的成年人（例如，教师，临时教师，午餐人员，办公室工作人员等）。
16. The classroom teacher may provide individual rapport-building time with [Student] and possibly a friend or two, before/after school or during lunch. This will allow [Student] extra time to build comfort, and thereby increase the likelihood of communication. 
16.课堂教师可以在学生之前/之后或午餐时间与[学生]和可能的一两个朋友提供个人关系建立时间。这将允许[学生]额外的时间来建立舒适度，从而增加沟通的可能性。

17. Allow [Student] to spend time with [her/his] teacher before the school year starts. This may take the form of working with the child and keyworker to transfer speech prior to the end of the previous school year, and/or may include coming into the school in the days prior to school beginning to get comfortable and develop rapport with the new teacher. The open- house is not adequate, since it is generally short, conducted in a group, and may be chaotic and anxiety-provoking for [Student]. Instead, these meetings should be only the teacher, child, and parent or keyworker, and should be done in a relaxed and fun manner. 
17.允许[学生]在学年开始前与[他/她]老师共度时光。这可能采取与孩子和关键工作者合作的形式，在上一学年结束之前转移语音，和/或可能包括在学校开始之前的几天进入学校，以便与新学生建立融洽关系。老师。开放日是不够的，因为它通常很短，在一个小组中进行，并且对于[学生]可能是混乱和焦虑的。相反，这些会议应该只是教师，孩子，父母或关键工作者，应该以轻松和有趣的方式完成。

18. Allow [Student]’s parents/family members to have access to the school environment during off hours (before and after school, during summer months) to promote comfort and eventually verbalization when alone with a parent and eventually, one or more peers or a teacher. 
18.允许[学生]的父母/家庭成员在非工作时间（学前和课后，夏季）进入学校环境，以便在与父母一起并最终与一个或多个同伴一起时提高舒适度并最终进行语言表达还是老师

19. If the child is working with a clinical psychologist outside of the school setting, consider inviting the psychologist into the school for sessions in order to generalize “brave work” into the school setting. Minimally, the psychologist should be invited to participate in team meetings in the school. 
19.如果孩子在学校以外与临床心理学家合作，请考虑邀请心理学家进入学校参加课程，以便将“勇敢的工作”推广到学校环境中。最低限度，应邀请心理学家参加学校的团队会议。

20. Each year [Student] should be moved up to the next teacher with his/her close friends, particularly with those to whom he/she speaks. [Student] will be placed with accepting teachers to be chosen with team and parent input. 
20.每年[学生]应该与他/她的亲密朋友，特别是与他/她说话的人交往下一位老师。 [学生]将与接受教师一起选择与团队和家长的投入。

21. The district will provide faculty training through consultations and attendance at SM conferences. Appropriate workshops and seminars can be found at www.selectivemutism.org on the calendar of events. 
21.学区将通过协商和参加SM会议提供教师培训。可在www.selectivemutism.org上的活动日程表上找到适当的研讨会和研讨会。

22. The district will purchase selective mutism educational materials to educate the child’s teachers and all school personnel. A training video for school professionals on treating selective mutism is available at www.selectivemutismtreatment.com.
22.学区将购买选择性缄默教育材料，以教育儿童的教师和所有学校人员。有关治疗选择性缄默症的学校专业人士的培训视频，请访问www.selectivemutismtreatment.com。
23. The school will provide quarterly parent/faculty meetings to update and report upon accommodations and progress.
23.学校将提供季度家长/教师会议，以更新和报告住宿和进展情况。
 
24. Resources on selective mutism should be utilized for further suggestions and information about [Student]’s condition. Please visit the Selective Mutism Group at www.selectivemutism.org for up-to-date information for teachers, professionals and parents. It is recommended that all individuals within the school who will be acting as interventionists (e.g., keyworkers, teachers, etc.) read Selective Mutism by Aimee Kotrba, Ph.D., in order to fully understand the conceptualization of Selective mutism as well as the details and workings of the intervention plan.
24.应利用有关选择性缄默的资源，提供有关[学生]病情的进一步建议和信息。请访问www.selectivemutism.org上的选择性Mutism小组，获取教师，专业人士和家长的最新信息。建议学校内将扮演干预主义者的所有个人（如关键工作者，教师等）阅读Aimee Kotrba博士的选择性突变，以充分理解选择性缄默症的概念化以及干预计划的细节和运作。
REFERENCES
For your convenience, you may download a PDF version of the Treatment Forms and Handouts in this book from our website: go.pesi.com/SelectiveMutism
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Publishing. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (n.d.). Acquiring English as a Second Language. Retrieved May 1, 2014, from
http://www.asha.org/public/speech/development/easl.htm#sthash.MfUS4JQf.dpuf: Barnett, D., Bauer, A., Bell, S., Elliott, N., Haski, H., Barkley, E., et al. (2007). Preschool Intervention Scripts: Lessons from 20 Years of
Research and Practice. The Journal of Speech-Language Pathology and Applied Behavior Analysis, 2, 158-181. Beidel, D.C. (1996). Assessment of childhood social phobia: Construct, convergent, and discriminative validity of the Social Phobia and
Anxiety Inventory for Children (SPAI-C). Psychological Assessment, 8(3), 235-240. Bergman R.L., Piacentini, J., McCracken, J.T. (2002). Prevalance and description of selective mutism in a school-based sample. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41(8), 938-946. Bergman, R.L., Gonzoles, A., Piacentini, J., (2013). Integrated Behavior Therapy for selective mutism: A randomized controlled pilot
study. Behaviour research and therapy, 51, 680-689. Blum, N., Kell, R., Starr, H., Lender, W., Bradley-Klug, K., Osborne, M., et al. (1998). Case study: audio feedforward treatment of
selective mutism. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37(1), 40-43. Blumberg, S. B. (2013). Changes in parent-reported prevalence of autism spectrum disorder in school-aged US children: 2007 to 2011-
2012. National Health Statistics Reports, 65, 1-12. Chavira, D.A., Shipon-Blum, E., Stein, M.B. (2007). Selective mutism and social anxiety disorder: All in the family? Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46(11), 1464-1472. Cohan, S.L., Chavira, D.A., Shipon-Blum, E., Hitchcock, C., Roesch, S.C., & Stein, M.B. (2008). Refining the classification of children
with selective mutism: A latent profile analysis. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 37(4), 770-784. Davis, M. (1992). The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 15(1), 353-375. Dunn Buron, K. (2007). A 5 Could Make Me Lose Control! An activity-based method for evaluating and supporting highly anxious
students. Lenexa: Autism Aspergers Publishing Company. Lenexa: KS. Garcia, A.M. (2004). Selective mutism. In: Phobic and Anxiety Disorders in Children and Adolescents: A Clinician’s Guide to
Psychosocial and Pharmacological Interventions (pp. 433-456). New York: Oxford University Press. Grice, K. (2002). Eligibility under IDEA for other health impaired children. School Law Bulletin, 8-12. Head Start. (2006). Policy and Regulations for Eligibility Criteria: Speech and Language Impairments. Retrieved December 20, 2013, from Head Start: http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/standards/Head%20Start%20Requirements/1308/1308.9%20%20Eligibility%20criteria_%20Speech%20or%20languag Kearney, C.A. & Vecchio, J. (2006). Functional analysis and treatment of selective mutism in children. Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology and Applied Behavioral Analysis, 1(2), 141-148. For your convenience, you may download a PDF version of the Treatment Forms and Handouts in this book from our website:
go.pesi.com/SelectiveMutism Klein, E.R., Armstrong, S.L., Shipon-Blum, E. (2013). Assessing spoken language competence in children with selective mutism: Using
parents as test presenters. Communications Disorders Quarterly, 34(3), 1-12. Koeppen, A.S. (1974). Relaxation training for children. Elementary School Guidance and Counseling, 9(1), 14-21. Krysanski, V.L. (2003). A brief review of selective mutism literature. Journal of Psychology, 137(1), 29-40. Kumpulainen, K. (2002). Phenomonology and treatment of selective mutism. CNS Drugs, 16(3), 175-180. Kurtz, S. (2011, October). Treating professional’s guide to the functional behavioral assessment of selective mutism. Presented at the
Selective Mutism Group Conference. New York, NY. Kurtz, S. (2013, October). Intensive treatment of selective mutism. Presented at the Selective Mutism Group Annual Conference. Berkeley,
CA. Kussmaul, A. (1877). Die Stoerungen der Sprache [Disturbances in linguistic function]. Basel, Switzerland: Benno Schwabe. Lynas, C. (2012, October). I want to face my fears: how parents can promote change in their child with selective mutism. Presented at the
Selective Mutism Group Annual Conference. Berkeley, CA. Matzner, F. Silva, R., Silvan, M., Chowdhury M., Nastasi, L. (1997, May). Preliminary test-retest reliability of the KID-SCID. Presented at
the Scientific Proceedings of American Psychatric Association Meeting. San Diego, CA. McNeil, C. & Hembree-Kigin, T.L. (2011). Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (Issues in Clinical Child Psychology). New York:Springer. Muchnik, C., Ari-Even Roth, D., Hildesheimer, M., Arie, M., Bar-Haim, Y., Henkin, Y. (2013). Abnormalities in auditory efferent
activities in children with selective mutism. Audiology and Neurotology, 18(6), 353-361. Oerbeck, B., Stein, M., Wentzel-Larsen, T., Langsrud, O., Kristensen, H. (2013). A randomized controlled trial of a home and school-based intervention for selective mutism—defocused communicaiton and behavioural techniques. Child and Adolescent Mental Health. DOI; 10.1111/camh.12045. Pearson Education.(n.d.). Pearsons: Clinical Assessment. Retrieved July 17, 2012, from Pearsons Website:
http://www.pearsonassessments.com/HAIWEB/Cultures/en-us/Productdetail.htm?Pid=0158036603 Pionek Stone, B., Kratochwill, T., Sladezcek, I., Serlin, D.C. (2002). Treatment of selective mutism: A best-evidence synthesis. School
Psychology Quarterly, 17(2), 168-190. Reynolds, C.R., Kamphaus, R.W. (2004). BASC-2: Behavior assessment system for children, second edition manual. Circle Pines, MN:
AGS Publishing. Rohrer, D., Taylor, K., Pashler, H., Cepeda, N.J., Wixted, J.T. (2005). The effect of overlearning on long-term retention. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 19, 361-374. Rollnick, S. & Miller, W.R. (1995). What is motivational interviewing? Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 325-334. Schill, M.T., Kratochwill, T.R., Gardner, W.I. (1996). An assessment protocol for selective mutism: Analogue assessment using parents as
facilitators. Journal of School Psychology, 34(1), 1-21. Schultz, E. (2014, April). Program Evaluation of Group Therapy for selective mutism. Masters Thesis Defense. Dearborn, MI, USA:
University of Michigan–Dearborn. Schwartz, R.H., Freedy, A.S., Sheridan, M.J. (2006). Selective mutism: Are primary care physicians missing the silence? Clinical
Pediatrics, 45(1), 43-48. Sharoni, M. (2012). Selective mutism. The Israeli Journal of Pediatrics, 79, 18-21. Shipon-Blum, E. (2003). The ideal classroom setting for the selectively mute child. Philadelphia, PA: SMart Center Publications. Shriver, M.D., Segool, N., Gortmaker, V. (2011). Behavior Observations for Linking Assessment to Treatment of selective mutism.
Education and Treatment of Children, 34(3), 389-411. Steinhausen, H.C., Wachter, M., Laimbock, K., Metzke, C.W. (2005). A long-term outcome study of selective mutism in childhood.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(7), 751-756. Vecchio, J., Kearney, C.A. (2009). Treating youths with selective mutism with an alternating design of exposure-based practice and
contingency management. Behavior Therapy, 40(4), 380-392. Yeganeh, R., Beidel, D.C., Turner, S.M., Pina, A.A., Silverman, W.K. (2003). Clinical distinctions between selective mutism and social phobia: An investigation of childhood psychopathology. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42(9), 1069-1075.


AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY
Aimee Kotrba, Ph.D, is a licensed clinical psychologist specializing in the expert assessment and treatment of Selective Mutism and Social Anxiety. Dr. Kotrba is the owner and lead psychologist at Thriving Minds Behavioral Clinic in Brighton, Michigan, a specialty clinic dedicated to effective treatment for children with Selective Mutism and other pediatric anxiety disorders.
Dr. Kotrba currently serves as the president of the Selective Mutism Group (SMG) Board of Directors and as the psychological expert for a local Selective Mutism parent support group. Her work has appeared in numerous media outlets, including Livingston County Parent Journal and MetroParent Magazine. She is a nationally recognized speaker and regularly offers local, national, and international workshops on the identification and treatment of Selective Mutism for parents, professionals, and school personnel.

作者简历
Aimee Kotrba博士是一名持牌临床心理学家，专门从事选择性突变和社交焦虑的专家评估和治疗。 Kotrba博士是密歇根州布莱顿Thriving Minds Behavioral Clinic的所有者和首席心理学家，这是一家致力于为选择性突变和其他儿童焦虑症患儿提供有效治疗的专科诊所。
Kotrba博士目前担任选择性Muttivity小组（SMG）董事会主席和当地选择性突变主义家长支持小组的心理专家。她的作品曾出现在众多媒体上，包括利文斯顿县家长杂志和MetroParent杂志。她是全国公认的演讲者，并定期为家长，专业人士和学校人员提供有关选择性突变的识别和治疗的地方，国家和国际研讨会。
