Chapter One
WHY DOESN'T MY CHILD SPEAK?



The journey begins for many parents with an appointment at a psychologist's office after their
son's (or daughter's) teacher or a school representative has contacted them. The bewildered
parent reports their seemingly normal child is not speaking outside of the home. The parents are confused - he speaks easily at home; and although he is considered "shy" by family members, he does have friends in the neighborhood with whom he talks and plays. However, his teacher and school staff are reporting that he is silent and appears frozen in normal school settings. He makes poor eye contact and rarely engages other children in play during recess. His parents are understandably upset and wonder: If he speaks at home, why isn't he speaking at school? Perhaps he is trying to get out of doing schoolwork? Maybe he simply doesn't like his teacher? Could he have been bullied on the playground?

Confusion, frustration, and helplessness are among the ways peers and adults may react to a child with SM, a child who may exhibit physical freezing, poor eye contact, and difficulty responding to and initiating verbal communication. The key component of selective mutism is a fear of speaking in situations outside of the home. Many children with SM struggle to speak with peers and adults in school and in public, as well as with extended family or family friends. Selective mutism is relatively rare and is estimated to occur in only 1% of the population which makes it difficult for parents and school personnel to recognize it.

⚫ Common traits of SM include: difficulty initiating communication or responding verbally and nonverbally, poor eye contact, physical freezing, delay in responding (long pause between the question and the child's response), slowness to "warm up" to people, anxiety around engaging in social interactions (especially group social situations such as birthday parties or in less structured social interactions such as recess)

⚫ Other challenges for children with SM can include: generalized anxiety, specific phobias, toileting issues, sensory issues, language disorders or interrupted speech fluency, obsessive-compulsive traits, separation anxiety, social anxiety (including eating in front of others, speaking or performing in front of a group, asking to use the bathroom), cognitive inflexibility, and fears about using the public restroom

Due to the lack of public knowledge about SM and the typical nature of children with selective children do not receive an official diagnosis or begin treatment until approximately 6-9 years of around 2-4 years of age. Typically, children with SM exhibit anxiety or hesitancy in social s age. However, historical reports by parents suggest that symptoms of SM begin much earlier - from a very early age, but it is not recognized as a "problem" until the child enters school. The setting, but upon entry to elementary school many children regress or have increasing difficulty i child may be completely silent in preschool or may speak to a few peers or adults in the preschool speaking (perhaps due to increased academic and performance demands, a longer school day, or more children in the environment).


Many children with SM are also socially reluctant or have social anxiety. Social anxiety and SM
frequently go together and have overlapping characteristics; however, they are currently considered two distinct diagnoses. Social anxiety is defined as a fear of social evaluation and judgement. This discomfort can lead to physical symptoms including sweating, headaches, stomachaches, and a rapid heartrate. The outcome of this discomfort or anxiety is typically avoidance of social situations. In contrast, SM is best conceptualized as a specific phobia - a specific fear of speaking more commonly describe it as a difficulty or discomfort, or even a lack of desire/motivation to or communicating. However, children with SM may or may not describe it is a "fear;" instead, they speak in social situations. Approximately 90% of children diagnosed with SM will also experience the symptoms of social anxiety. Clinical experience and research (Oerbeck, Overgaard, Stein, Pripp, & Kristensen, 2018) suggest that those 10% of children who do not have co-existing social anxiety are easier to treat and respond faster to treatment. They may also have better long-term outcomes because they do not experience the "double anxiety" of worrying about others hearing their voice and possibly judging or evaluating them.

Currently, prevalence rates suggest that girls are twice as likely to receive a diagnosis of SM in comparison to their male counterparts (Dummit, et al., 1997). We are not entirely certain why this phenomenon occurs; some hypotheses include:

-

⚫ Hypothesis 1 - Women are more likely to struggle with anxiety disorders at any age. 
⚫ Hypothesis 2 - There is a social expectation that girls will be more talkative and socially engaging, and when a girl does not meet these social standards it is more apparent/striking, therefore leading to evaluation and diagnosis.

⚫ Hypothesis 3 - Boys who exhibit these same characteristics may be incorrectly diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder or Oppositional Defiant Disorder

There is a lot of misinformation about the development of selective mutism. Some laypeople (and even professionals!) still believe that lack of speech is secondary to a trauma in the child's history. Some misinterpret it as oppositionality, defiance, or willfulness. However, research leans toward anxiety that has been increased by environmental, biological, genetic, and temperamental factors.






BIOLOGICAL

Amygdala

ENVIRONMENTAL

TEMPERAMENT

GENETICS 

Selective mutism develops through several factors, but the focus of most research is on the pattern of learned avoidance of speaking. Children with SM may be born with a genetic predisposition for anxiety, and therefore when they are placed in situations with any possible social or performance component, their overactive amygdala (the brain's guard dog) screams "Danger!" and sets into motion the fight, flight, or freeze response. Our amygdala exists to keep us safe, and when it perceives any danger it prepares our body to respond in a way that will keep us safe and alive. It sends more oxygen to the blood or muscles to help them run, fight, or hold still. It tenses the muscles so that they can spring into action. It quickens the heartrate to push blood to large muscles. It allows for faster thinking and racing thoughts. It even slows down "unnecessary" bodily actions, like digestion, to focus on keeping the body safe (this, coupled with tensed stomach muscles, can explain why stomachaches can occur with anxiety). Our body is an amazing and efficient protector........except that in this scenario, no one needs protection! Our body makes us believe that we are in danger when we are only in discomfort!

—

When children enter social situations (e.g., school, playdates, extracurricular activities, etc.) with an overactive amygdala, they use the typical human coping response to anxiety - avoidance! They try to exit the situation, have parents/peers/siblings/adults speak for them, freeze and don't respond, or give a fearful or even defiant look to the person trying to engage them. Most adults and peers can feel the child's anxiety and hesitancy to respond, and they do not want to push the child or make them uncomfortable; others step in and "rescue" by responding for the child, reducing or completely extinguishing questions or prompts to speak, or only asking questions that can be responded to nonverbally (i.e., nodding, pointing, writing, etc.).

Just like we might choose a different hiking path if we know a bear was spotted on a trail up ahead, children who are anxious have a tendency to stay away from what causes their body to shout, 'Danger'.


Our kind attempts at rescuing the child from their anxiety only serve to reinforce the child's anxiety. Rescuing may make them feel better in the short-term (it feels good to escape from things that make us nervous or uncomfortable), but it accidentally suggests to the child tha they cannot or should not handle the discomfort that comes with responding. Worst of all, we all practice this cycle of behavior numerous times per day, hundreds of times per week, thousands of times year! The child becomes quite good at avoiding and the people around the child become quite good at rescuing! Thus, the older the child, the harder it is to break this cycle (and treat selective mutism) because everyone has become exceedingly good at their role.

Reducing "rescuing" behavior is an important step in helping your child be brave, and in this point, simply increasing your awareness of rescuing should help you to begin thinking about Chapter 5 we will discuss behavioral intervention, including how to reduce accidental rescuing. At the ways in which you might help to break the cycle.
Selective Mutism Subtypes
Recent research suggests that there may be three subtypes of selective mutism (Mulligan & Shipon- Blum, 2015). While understanding the subtypes can be helpful in planning an individual child’s treatment or intervention, each child is different and some children with SM may not fit neatly into one of these categories.


Understanding the Myths About SM

Selective mutism is a commonly misunderstood disorder, and this can lead to frustration for parents, schools, and even friends of children with SM. Some common myths about SM include:

Myth: A child with SM is just defiant, and others should demand that they speak. 
Truth: Children with SM can at times appear defiant, but research suggests that their lack of speech is driven by anxiety. For example, if you were fearful of spiders and someone asked you to face that fear (hold a big tarantula) you would likely start by politely declining. If that person was pushy and forceful, and demanded that you hold the spider, eventually you would appear defiant - maybe even yelling, crying, or running away! Children with SM may appear oppositional, but their behavior is more likely a nonverbal coping strategy to avoid what they are afraid of - speaking. When faced with a fearful situation, they are unable to politely refuse or use words to express their discomfort.

Myth: Children with SM have a history of abuse, neglect, or trauma that has caused them to stop speaking.

Truth: There is NO evidence of a causal relationship between abuse, neglect, or trauma and the development of selective mutism. In fact, most parents will state that their child showed characteristics of inhibition, fearfulness, anxiety, separation issues, sensitivity, difficulties being soothed, and weaknesses in emotional control from a very young age. This does not indicate that children with SM cannot have trauma in their background, but research has not found a direct connection between trauma and the occurrence of SM.

Myth: These children are autistic, not selectively mute.

Truth: Selective mutism and autism spectrum disorder can occur together in the same child, but are distinctly different diagnoses. Selective mutism is a fear of speaking that generally occurs in social or performance situations, but most children speak normally at home and/or when they are comfortable. They may have some social skill weaknesses (due to a lack of social experiences) but they still understand the perspectives and feelings of others. Kids 
with SM have a desire to make friends and have relationships.

There are children who qualify both for a diagnosis of SM and ASD; these children tend to present with reduced or no speech in social or performance settings, but more frequent/comfortable speech at home (even if it includes poor pragmatic speech or immature social interactions). They tend to be rigid and have a hard time understanding social dynamics and social reciprocity (back and forth conversations and interactions) even when comfortable. They frequently show restricted and repetitive interests and behaviors. Even when comfortable and verbal, their social interactions may look awkward or immature.

Myth: Adults should simply stop requesting speech or asking the child to engage with them. Eventually, when the child is ready, they will naturally start speaking.

Truth: If we take away all prompts to speak or engage, and don't encourage the child to face their fear, they typically will NOT magically wake up one day ready to talk! It is important that we don't push a child beyond their capacity or ask them to do brave work that is much beyond their current ability, but intervention must include prompting and encouraging a child to move out of their comfort zone and in the direction of being brave and using their voice.

Myth: If people ask the child to do things that are challenging, we will make their anxiety worse and they will shatter.

Truth: Children are tough and resilient. If only we could all possess the capacity for rebounding like children do! It is our job as interventionists to pace the demands carefully, never asking them to do anything they cannot do, but making a child slightly uncomfortable or placing them a little outside of their comfort zone is truly the only way they will grow. What if we only ask a child to read books that are well within their reading level? Only ask them to practice sports at their current level of skill? Only give them lessons on math that they already know? They would never learn more and develop more.

Myth: Children will grow out of SM.

Truth: Many children impacted by SM will NOT just naturally begin to talk. Sometimes well-intentioned school professionals, individuals in the medical community, and even friends and relatives perpetuate this myth. It is incredibly common that families do not show up for treatment for months or even years after first noticing signs and symptoms of SM because others told them that the child would likely grow out of it. Instead, time will pass, the child will practice avoidance of speech, and parents/friends/teachers will accommodate this avoidance and will stop prompting them to speak altogether (in fact, they may even reinforce the avoidance by encouraging the use of gestures, answering by writing or with white boards, using sign language, etc.). This avoidance will become part of the child's behavioral repertoire and will be increasingly difficult to treat. Rather than improving over time, a child's SM symptoms could get worse without intervention.

Instead of "rolling the dice" and waiting to determine if the child will "grow out of it," we encourage families to seek intervention early and fully engage in the intervention. The intervention ideas described in this manual should not be harmful to any child, and can be experienced as fun and reinforcing!


Myth: Parents of children with SM are dysfunctional, hovering, helicopter parents.

Truth: Parents of children with SM tend to be typical, loving parents with one commonality – they have children who are very anxious! Additionally, it is possible that they are anxious themselves, since anxiety has a genetic component and tends to run in families. When somewhat anxious parents see their children become anxious or struggle, they may react by trying to protect them or shield them from discomfort. This is a natural response, especially for parents who know first-hand what anxiety feels like. Before it was widely recognized as an anxiety disorder, it was believed that family dysfunction, abuse, and/or parental pathology contributed to or caused SM. However, we now know that the parents of children with SM employ a wide range of healthy parenting styles and that their families come in all shapes and sizes.

Myth: Selective mutism is difficult to treat.

Truth: A growing body of research suggests that behavioral interventions can be very effective in treating children with selective mutism, with significant outcomes of increased speech and decreased feelings of anxiety. Despite these findings, many psychologists and mental health professionals still believe that SM is difficult to treat, and therefore do not learn intervention strategies or work with children with selective mutism. They are truly missing out. Working effectively with children with SM can be one of the most rewarding professional experiences.

Furthermore, medication has been shown to have positive impacts on reductions in anxiety and increases in the ability to approach uncomfortable situations. Many parents find that children who were unable to fully engage in treatment prior to medication can participate more fully after medication, thereby speeding up intervention time and allowing the child to feel the natural reward of speaking and socially engaging with others. Medications such as Zoloft and Prozac have the most research backing usage for the treatment of selective mutism (Bartarian, et al., 2018). We provide a more detailed discussion on medication in Chapter 5.

Read, Ask, and Learn More About SM

More facts, research, and data on SM can be found in Selective Mutism: An Assessment and Intervention Guide for Therapists, Educators, and Professionals. Our intent for this parent guide is to provide just the right amount of background information and knowledge to guide parents so you can directly help your child with SM. We also encourage you to find a good therapist who can help you to help your child (we will discuss how to do this in Chapter 4), but we understand that there are far too few experts in selective mutism. With this is mind, we aim to guide parents to be the incredible change agents we know that you can be!

While you are the expert on your child, beginning the process of supporting a child with SM can be difficult to face alone. You will also benefit from learning more about selective mutism, and from connecting with families who understand your struggle and can congratulate you on your victories. Organizations, books, and social media groups specific to SM can help you to form these connections. Here are some of our favorites:

Books
Treatment for Children with Selective Mutism: An Integrated Behavioral Approach, by R. Lindsey Bergman

Lola's/Leo's Words Disappeared, by Elaheh Bos

Maya's Voice, by Wen-Wen Cheng

Helping Children with Selective Mutism and Their Parents: A Guide for School-Based Professionals, by Christopher Kearney

The Selective Mutism Resource Manual, 2nd Edition, by Alison Wintgens and Maggie Johnson

Selective Mutism: An Assessment and Intervention Guide for Therapists, Educators, and Therapists, by Aimee Kotrba

Helping Your Child with Selective Mutism: Practical Steps to Overcome a Fear of Speaking, by Angela McHolm

Charli's Choices, by Marian Molden

The Selective Mutism Treatment Guide: Manuals for Parents, Teachers, and Therapists: Still Waters Run Deep, by Ruth Peredik

• Understanding Katie, by Elisa Shipon-Blum

Can I Tell You About Selective Mutism: A Guide for Friends, Family, and Professionals, by Alison Wintgens and Maggie Johnson

Organizations and Websites

The Selective Mutism Association: http://www.selectivemutism.org/

Child Mind Institute Webinar Trainings: https://childmind.org/parent-educator. workshops-selective-mutism/

Anxiety BC: http://www.anxietybc.com/parenting/selective-mutism

Selective Mutism Information and Research Association (SMIRA - UK based): http://www.selectivemutism.org.uk/

Selective Mutism Learning University: http://selectivemutismlearning.org/

Facebook Social Media Groups
Parents of Children with Selective Mutism (US based but with active international followers)

Parents and Caretakers of Teens and Younger Adults with Selective Mutism (US based)

SMIRA - Selective Mutism Information and Research Association (UK based but with active international followers)

Selective Mutism Awareness (US based but with international followers)

Seeking out information from these books, websites, and organizations should give you a much clearer picture of what selective mutism is and what it is not. After reading, researching, and learning about SM from different resources, consider again your child's strengths and weaknesses. Do they seem to fit the diagnostic criteria for selective mutism?

Selective Mutism Diagnostic Criteria

Reluctance or unwillingness to speak to peers in school and in extracurricular or social activities

Reluctance or unwillingness to speak to adults in school or social activities This reluctance is more than "typical" hesitation with strangers or in the first moments of meeting a new person

This reluctance is maintained past the first month of school

Normal speech at home or when in comfortable settings (e.g., when no one else is paying attention)

Lack of speech causes problems in daily functioning (reduced social and academic soos verbal participation)

Children with SM may also Demonstrate these Difficulties

(although not diagnostic criteria):

Reluctance in nonverbal communication, creative/descriptive writing, or gestures 

Anxiety around being the center of attention or focus of others, such as when adults are verbally praising them

Speech, language, and pragmatic communication weaknesses, even when

comfortable

Other anxieties, fears, and worries

Hesitancy in using public restrooms or eating in public

Sensory issues

Mild social weaknesses or immaturities, possibly due to a lack of experience/practice

Anxiety surrounding making choices or advocating for themselves

Separation issues

It is important to note that some children will not qualify as meeting all criteria for selective mutism, but still have great hesitation to speak or socially engage. Johnson and Wintgens (2016) appropriately label these children as "reluctant speakers." You may be a parent, teacher, or professional reading through this book, and you might notice that the child you are thinking of should not be diagnosed with SM, yet their reluctance to speak impacts them negatively in public interactions, extracurricular activities, social relations, or school participation. Please continue reading and attending to the ideas and worksheets provided; the interventions discussed in this book will be helpful for the vast majority of reluctant speakers.

Both children with SM and reluctant speakers may limit their speech to a whispered voice or a very short verbal response.


If a diagnosis of SM is appropriate for your child, it isn't intended to stigmatize or label them, but instead is the beginning of understanding your child and helping others to understand them and their pattern of strengths and weaknesses. Furthermore, identification of SM allows for treatment in a clinical setting as well as intervention planning in the school setting. Later in the book, we provide more insight into the process for evaluation, diagnosis and intervention planning.
The Good News...

The good news is that there are effective interventions for selective mutism! Research continually demonstrates that the most effective intervention for SM is behavioral treatment using exposure (often referred to as brave practices) (Oerbeck, Stein, Wentzel-Larsen, Langsrud, & Kristensen, 2013; Vecchio & Kearney, 2009). Behavioral interventions are effective in reducing anxiety and increasing verbal communication. In a study on the effectiveness of interventions for SM, the researchers compared behavioral intervention to other treatment types, including medication, family systems therapy, and psychodynamic interventions (Pionek-Stone, Kratochwill, Sladezcek, & Serlin, 2002). The study found that behaviorally-oriented treatments show the largest improvements (Bergman, Gonzalez, Piacentini, & Keller, 2013). Another study found that after behavioral treatment, parents and teachers reported that children had increased their communication, were speaking more at intervention with kids! school, and anxiety had decreased. Furthermore, parents can be effective in carrying out this intervention with kids!
