Chapter Five

INTERVENTION TOOLS FOR COMMUNICATION SUCCESS!

Understanding the Toolkit 
Tools for overcoming selective mutism

The wonderful thing about trying to overcome selective mutism now vs. twenty years ago is our recent advancements in the understanding of SM and the "tools" available for treatment. In this chapter, we will introduce these tools and we will revisit them in Chapter 7 to explain how to use them flexibly. If one tool "fails" or doesn't seem to be working optimally, another is likely available to meet the intended goal. Some challenges might even require using a combination of tools. We recommend that parents become familiar with each tool we describe in this chapter so that if it is needed, it will be accessible!

We become what we behold.

We shape our tools and then our tools shape us.

-Marshall Mcluhan


Tools for Communication Success 
Specific strategies used to promote speech

Shaping

Rapport Building

Stimulus Fading

Medical Intervention

Verbal Prompting

Rapport Building
A specific and planned approach to providing a comfortable environment and building trust, to set the tone for a positive interaction

Verbal Prompting
Providing specific and targeted prompts, directing the child in a way optimizes their ability to respond

Stimulus Fading
The process of taking existing speech and adding in new communication partners slowly or moving the speech into new environments

Speech Shaping
The prompting and practicing of slow steady steps toward increasingly difficult levels of speech

Medical Intervention S
elective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) may be prescribed for children 
who are struggling to participate in behavioral therapy and make progress toward overcoming SM



Tool #1 Rapport Building 
Child Directed Interaction

Child Directed Interaction (CDI) is a specific rapport building intervention that not only promotes a positive relationship with the child (a necessity of any good therapeutic intervention) but also sets the stage for the brave work that will come later (Carpenter, Puliafico, Kurtz, Pincus, & Comer, 2014). While there are many helpful ways of building rapport, CDI is a structured model (from Parent/Child Interaction Therapy, or PCIT; McNeil & Hembree-Kigin, 2010). In addition to building rapport, CDI skills can be used to help a child warm up (e.g., at the start them feel positive and understood. of the school day), calm down when they are overwhelmed, and to generally help them feel positive and understood.

If a therapist is working with your child using Child Directed Interaction, you can expect: 
The therapist will engage in one-on-one play with your child in a private setting (perhaps with you present).
This will allow the therapist to focus on the child and remove any possible barriers to the child feeling comfortable and relaxed.

The therapist will play at your child's developmental level and follow their lead.
Activities that lend themselves well to this type of play include open- ended, creative play such as arts and crafts, constructional toys such as Legos, building blocks, magnetic blocks, dollhouses with miniature people, and marble run sets. With older children, developmentally-appropriate (e.g., more complex) arts and crafts projects, board games, apps, etc. can be used to interact. It is helpful to let the therapist know what enjoys playing with and/or what might interest them. 

The therapist will use PRIDE skills to build rapport. 
PRIDE skills are rapport-building techniques designed to encourage positive interactions and enhance relationships. As the child begins to reach a comfort level with the therapist, the therapist may direct the parent to slowly disengage and perhaps leave the room.

PRIDE skills are the most dependable way to quickly build rapport with children and may be used by parents, family members, friends, therapists, coaches and teachers!


PARENT POINTER

If your child is specific about the toys they enjoy playing with or if they are showing a keen interest in a special toy at the time of your appointment, bring it along!

PARENT POINTER

Parents are oftentimes directed to use CDI skills with their children prior to intervention at 
a therapist's office or prior to embarking on brave practices with their children in the community.

Tool #2 - Verbal Prompting 
Verbal Directed Interaction

Verbal Directed Interaction (VDI) (Carpenter, Puliafico, Kurtz, Pincus, & Comer, 2014) provides the structure and framework for successful verbal prompts. It provides a flowchart of how to prompt, how to react to speech, and what to do when the child doesn't respond (Kurtz S., 2017). The adult is tasked with changing the way in which children are prompted to speak or engage. We can think of VDI as a verbal "sleight of hand" - it happens without the child realizing it's happening, but remarkably the changes in the way we address and interact with the child can make all the difference. Typically, these strategies are used in the adult has built rapport with CDI. the context of stimulus fading and shaping (see Tools #3 and #4) and occur after the adult has built rapport with CDI.

First, the child is prompted to speak with a forced-choice or open-ended question. For children who are just beginning to speak comfortably, forced-choice questions provide a great structure for a response, as they give the child the correct response options and they need only choose one and say it (examples of these types of questions can be found on the Helping a Child to Respond handout). This type of question bypasses any processing or language issues they might have and prevents the child from freezing due to anxiety about the "right" answer. Children with no speech issues, or those who are milder in their presentation or further along in treatment, may benefit from a mix of forced-choice and open-ended questions. Avoid yes/no questions, if possible, as they allow (and even encourage) head nodding and shaking. Remember, VDI emphasizes verbal communication as compared to CDI where nonverbal responses are acceptable.

After asking the question, the adult waits at least 5 (painful!) seconds. If the child responds verbally, the adult gives calm labeled praise and a reflection of what the child said ("You want a brownie - thanks for letting me know," "Brownie - great answer," or "I love that idea - I love brownies").

If the child responds nonverbally (shrugging shoulders, pointing, nodding), the adult acknowledges the gesture but prompts again for a verbal response ("I see you nodding, but I'm not sure which one you were nodding for...Do you want a brownie or a cookie?"). If the child responds, calm praise and reflection are given. 
If the child does not respond, wait five seconds and re-ask the question (make sure you have formatted the question as forced-choice, and that the question is clear and easy to answer; if not, this is a great point at which to reformat your question). If the child responds, give calm praise and reflection. If the child does not respond, make the prompt easier. Ways to make the prompt easier include pulling the child aside in a private area, requesting the first sound of the word, returning to a previous question the child was able to respond to, or reminding them of possible rewards for using their brave voice.

PARENT POINTER
When meeting a new therapist who is familiar with SM, it is important to realize that the therapist will not prompt your child to speak. It is unlikely that your child will answer and prompting at this point could set up a pattern of anxiety and avoidance for your child with this therapist. In the same vein, you should not prompt your child to talk to the therapist yet, including greetings and polite words, unless you are certain that your child is capable of verbalizing in this scenario. Instead, the therapist should use CDI (or another form of rapport building) to set the tone for a positive relationship.

PARENT POINTER
Some kids may notice this new way of interacting, may ask "Why are you talking differently?" Parents can respond that they are learning new ways of interacting with people, or could simply change the subject (eg, "Oh, really? I didn't even notice that I was speaking differently! Let's get a snack.").




Helping a Child to Respond
Using Verbal Directed Interaction for SM

When should I use Verbal Directed Interaction (VDI)?

At the doctor, grocery store, library, or anytime that your child is prompted to speak but seems unable to do so!

Waitress asks an unexpected question:

What sauce would you like for your nuggets?


VERBAL Response
Child: Ranch

Labeled PRAISE
Parent: Ranch. Great job letting her know.


NON-VERBAL Response
Child: Points to menu

Child PROMPTED
Parent: I see you pointing. Do you want BBQ or Ranch?

VERBAL Response
NO Response -

NO Response 
Child: Silent, possibly avoiding eye contact

WAIT 5 Seconds

Parent: Could you ask if she wants BBQ or Ranch? 
Clerk: BBQ or Ranch?

WAIT 5 Seconds & Repeat Question 
Parent: Would you like BBQ or Ranch?

NO Response

End on a positive note with a 'win'! 
Pull the child aside to practice/answer (remind them of their goals/rewards and to breathe) OR Direct the child to engage at their current ability level - answer with first sound, hold up fingers, smile, head nod or shake, point, etc. 
Parent: We are working on brave talking and I'll bet she'll let you know next time!
VDI Vocabulary
Forced Choice Question: BEST for beginners
A question asked in a way that provides the answer options, making it easier for a child to respond

Open Ended Question: ADVANCED skill

A question that allows for any possible answer and can lead to extended responses

YES/NO Questions: To be AVOIDED

A question that requires only a yes or no response and may lend itself to speech avoidance because the child can easily respond with a gesture (nodding or shaking head) instead of speech.

VDI Practice: Modifying Prompts

YES/NO Questions

Do you like dogs? 
Are you in science class this year?
Do you want a sandwich for lunch?
Do you want to play with the blocks?
Is your birthday in June?
Did you travel on a plane?
Can I open your juice box?


Forced Choice Questions 
Do you like dogs or cats better? 
Do you have biology, chemistry, or neither this year? 
Would you prefer a sandwich, hot dog or something else?
Do you want to play blocks, puzzles, or something else? 
Is your birthday in June or July?

Open-Ended Questions 
What is your favorite animal? 
What science class are you this year?
What do you want for lunch today?
What do you want to play with?
When is your birthday?

Open-Ended Follow-up
Why do you like dogs?
What is your project for the science fair?
What are some of the things you like to eat on hot dogs?
What are some of the things you like to build with blocks? 
What will you do for your birthday?


With VDI, we suggest that you avoid the following scenarios:

Don't accept a nonverbal response such as shrugging or nodding: 
Unless this is the current step on the pathway, it does not promote verbalizing or make the response easier. growth; instead, pull the child aside where they may be more comfortable verbalizing or make the response easier.

Don't move on without waiting at least five seconds for an answer:
Some children will need additional processing time; give them time to muster the courage!

Don't forget to praise or reflect the child's response:
By doing so, you are letting them know that they have been heard. Some children need to know that their efforts are appreciated.

Don't pepper the child with too many questions:
Children need time to respond, so peppering them with questions at "rapid fire" may cause them to feel overwhelmed and to shut down. 

Don't ask very difficult or complex questions:
If we set the bar too high, they won't be able to reach for it! These questions should not be testing the child's knowledge or speech capabilities; they should only be challenging the child to speak.

Don't give over-the-top, excited praise:
If we become too animated and excited, many children will feel embarrassed. We must be mindful that some children do not want attention to be drawn to them.
Adding New Communication Partners 
Using Stimulus Fading with CDI & VDI

What is stimulus fading for selective mutism?

Stimulus fading is a behavioral intervention technique used to take the existing speech of a child and expand (generalize) it to new people, places, or activities.

Why is stimulus fading effective?

Stimulus fading provides for small steps and the slow introduction of new communication partners while children interact playfully with a parent or comfortable communication partner.

How is speech elicited with the stimulus fading technique?

The child should be engaged in fun, familiar, simple speech demands - board games that promote speech, naming or counting activities, scripted pretend play (e.g. school, restaurant, etc.) and reading aloud.

Where should stimulus fading take place?

Until a child is comfortable speaking with a new communication partner, stimulus fading should take place in a private setting, such as an office, empty classroom, or the child's home.

Who should be involved?

A comfortable communication partner, such as a parent or therapist, should engage the child in play and elicit speech while a new person slowly enters the interaction.

Example Scenario:


Child warms up in room, speaking with their parent or a comfortable communication partner. Parent and child play in a room, using games that naturally elicit speech.

1

Child speaks in vicinity of new person.

New person enters room (but does not pay attention to the child) and the child continues speaking to parent.

2

New person attends to the child's speech.

New person looks at child, nods, laughs, or smiles in response to what the child says.

3

New person acknowledges the child's speech through reflection.

"You want to play with the dolls next - great idea!".

4

New person asks questions to the child and the child answers.

"Are you going to play dolls?" with the boy or the girl dolls?”

5


6

Parent fades out of the interaction, leaving child to speak independently with the new communication partner.

Mother leaves to use the phone, and the child continues to answer the new person.

Tool #3 - Stimulus Fading

Transitioning communication to a new audience or environment

Certain people and environments are especially challenging for children with SM. Stimulus fading is a fancy label for the slow and thoughtful transition of a new communication partner into existing speech or moving speech from a location where the child speaks to a location where the child currently does not speak. Instead of a new person abruptly approaching your child in the midst of their anxiety and asking a pointed question, fading allows the child time to “desensitize, or get used to, the new communication partner through slow, measured steps. We offer a common but basic handout about stimulus fading on the next page to point out just how "slow" you may have to proceed in order to desensitize a child. We review three other common scenarios in more detail later in this section: helping children transition to speech with a new communication partner, helping children transition to speech within a small group, and helping children transition to speech in a new location.

Stimulus fading tends to be the most direct, easiest, and most generalizable intervention to use, so it's a very important tool for your toolbox! However, it requires one thing - existing speech that another person could overhear. If your child is unable to speak at all in the proximity of another person, or speaks only in a very quiet whisper directly in your ear, using stimulus fading may not be possible at the moment. To determine whether to use stimulus fading, ask yourself these questions:

Does the child speak to me in the environment where we will be practicing (e.g., school, grandma's house, playground)? 
If someone enters slowly, is it likely that the child will continue speaking to me in a volume that others might be able to hear?
Do I have access to a private location in that environment (e.g., a private room in the school, a very quiet corner in the gymnastics class, a study room in the library)?

If your answer is yes to all questions, stimulus fading is likely the best place to start. Stimulus fading should be thought of as slowly bringing someone new into a conversation or verbal exchange or moving speech to a new location and can be done in several different ways. Here are some general examples using the stimulus fading tool (but stimulus fading can be used in a multitude of different ways, so we encourage you to be creative!):

Speaking with a Teacher for the First Time

Stimulus Fading Example

The goal is to get the teacher, a new communication partner (NCP), into the with the child continuing to use appropriate speech. A parent, the current communication partner (CCP), is tasked with keeping the child speaking with fun activities that encourage speech, using forced-choice and open-ended questions. In the example below, we guide you through a stimulus fading procedure with the goal of a child speaking with a teacher for the first time. The parent will be the CCP and the teacher will be the NCP.

1. The parent and the child should have some time to "warm up" in the room, playing and talking alone with the door almost closed. During this time, full speech or a loud whisper (not a quiet whisper) must be obtained consistently before a new individual begins fading in. Don't forget that using CDI skills is a structured way to help your child speak and feel confident during this time. (*If several sessions pass and the child cannot warm up to the point of consistent speech, intervention must shift to shaping; see tool #4).

Parents should be sure to keep up a consistent but natural rate of questions/conversation through fun, engaging play.

PARENT POINTER

Parents should carefully determine appropriate adults for stimulus fading.
Important caregivers, teachers, and adults who have adequate time and commitment to the child can make excellent new communication partners. However, parents should also consider that some adults may be "contaminated." 
Occasionally, novel or less familiar adults are easier for the child to speak with initially.


PARENT POINTER

Parents who would like video examples of stimulus fading are encouraged to watch the "SM Mock Fade- In Procedure" video on the Thriving Minds Behavioral Health You Tube channel, or the "Understanding and Managing Selective Anxiety BC YouTube Mutism" video on the AnxietyBC you tube channel.

2. The teacher begins fading (or entering) into the room when the parent has obtained an appropriate volume of consistent speech from the child. The teacher should NOT respond in any way to what the child says or act as if they are attending to the child at this time. The teacher should very slowly enter the room, as far away from the child as possible, and busy themselves

(i.e., type on the computer, pick up the room, or do paperwork). If the child discontinues speaking or shows other signs of anxiety, slow the entrance even more or stay in the same position for several minutes until it appears that the child's anxiety is reduced and speech resumes.

3. The teacher should slowly start making their way toward the child by finding activities to do in closer proximity to the interaction but should continue to pay no overt attention to the child. Movement should continue to occur (slowly) if the child is still responding consistently to the parent.

4. When the teacher is close to the interaction and the child is maintaining speech, the teacher can begin to silently attend to the interaction (e.g., occasionally looking up at what the parent and child are doing, laughing when something funny occurs, smiling and showing enjoyment). No questions or comments should be made at this time.

5. If the child tolerates attention to their speech, the teacher can begin to reflect or respond to what the child is saying. For example, if the child tells the parent that they picked an elephant, the teacher could reflect, "Oh, you picked an elephant." If the child tells the parent that he played his new videogame last night, game the teacher could comment, "You played your new that sounds like fun." Again, NO questions should be asked at this time.

6.

-

When this seems comfortable and minimally anxiety- forced-choice questions. provoking, the teacher can begin asking occasional forced-choice questions.

a. Follow the VDI flowchart (Tool #2).

b. If the teacher needs help finding the right time to ask a question or using the forced choice format, the parent could suggest a question (e.g., "Mrs. Smith, I can't tell if she picked a bird or a butterfly. Can you ask her if she's got a bird or butterfly this time?"). 
c. If the child finds it too challenging to respond directly to the teacher at first, Plan B (or making it easier) might include the parent repeating the question, and when the child responds, the teacher will reflect by saying "Thanks for telling me.”

7. When the child is consistently responding to the teacher, the parent can begin to slowly fade out of the interaction and then the room, leaving the teacher and the child to continue interacting independently. Be sure to leave the room very slowly and naturally as this fading out process should never feel abrupt (e.g., check text messages or emails on your phone, stretch your legs by walking around the space, look at artwork on the wall, etc.).

If the teacher is unable to complete all steps in one session, at the next opportunity for a stimulus fading procedure the teacher could start outside the room again but attempt to fade in more quickly. This does not have to be the same day but should be as soon as possible (preferably within a few days).

If at any point the child stops speaking, the parent should make every attempt (through prompting, distraction, and reward systems) to re-engage the child in speaking. The teacher should stop and stay where they are. Sometimes, it is helpful for the teacher to take away any attention or even turn their body away from the child. A last recourse would be for the teacher to leave the room, let the parent re-establish speech, and then slowly return. Any loss of verbalizations should be considered a red flag for the teacher to move more slowly next time.

Speaking with a Small Group of Peers

Stimulus Fading Example

Once a child has been successful in adding communication partners privately, or if the child already speaks to many people one-on-one and struggles instead to speak to groups, the next step should include fading into a small group. In the example below, the child can speak in one-on-one situations but struggles to speak during small group activities.

A comfortable adult, one with whom your child currently speaks (usually a parent, teacher, keyworker, or therapist), should start engaging the child in an activity that requires or prompts for speech, preferably something the child finds enjoyable (board games, telling jokes, reading aloud, playing Twenty Questions, etc.). A small peer group should be generally out of earshot, engaging in a separate activity (e.g., playing a game themselves). They should be instructed before intervention to continue playing the game and not to attend to the other game (the child with SM or the adult working with them) until they are prompted to play.

As the child with SM gets comfortable speaking, the adult and child should slowly move toward the peer group (while maintaining speech). As they move closer to the group, the child's anxiety will likely increase initially, but will decrease with time.

PARENT POINTER

Be aware of Pathway Hazards-Only change one factor at a time (audience, environment, speech demand); if you are working to obtain speech in a new environment, the audience and the speech demand (or activity) should remain the same. For example, the adult should work independently with the child in a new environment before attempting to introduce new speaking partners in that same context.

When the child with SM and the adult are close to the peer group, and the child is still speaking to the adult, the peer group should be instructed to watch but NOT to comment or ask questions about the game that the adult and child are playing (e.g., "Hey, guys - I don't know if you know how to play this game that James and I are playing? Why don't you watch us quietly for a few minutes so you can learn but please remain quiet and don't ask any questions until I tell you that it's okay.").


If the child stops speaking as they near the peer group, the adult should move physically back to the last spot where speech was consistent with the child, and try to re-establish speech (e.g., "Oh, let's move back to the wall and start our game again"). This may be an indication that either the child is not quite ready to be introduced to a group of peers or the child needs to be moved more slowly toward the group.

Assuming that the child with SM maintains speech with the adult while the peer group is observing, the adult should engage the peer group in playing the same game (so that the child isn't speaking directly verbally in the to the peer group members, per se, but is engaging game with them).

After the child is speaking in front of the peer group, prompt the as part of the game, the adult may wish to directly peer group members to ask questions of this game again or a different one"). the child (e.g., "Brandon, ask James if he wants to play game again or a different one”).
Finally, if the child is maintaining speech within the peer group, and the peer group members are engaging the child with SM as they would other peer group members (not avoiding asking questions or leaving the child out), the adult can begin fading out of the game. First, they might finally leaving the interaction altogether. disengage attention from the game, then move away, before finally leaving the interaction altogether.

Speaking in a New Location

Stimulus Fading Example

Some children are very restrictive about the environments in which they will speak. For example, they might be used to speaking in the therapist's office, but as soon as the door opens, they become mute. Others might talk all the way to school, but as soon as the car is parked on school grounds, they shut down. For these children, stimulus fading of environments may be helpful.

1. A comfortable adult, one with whom your child currently speaks (usually a parent, teacher, keyworker, or therapist), should start engaging the child in an activity that requires or prompts for speech, preferably something the child finds enjoyable (board games, telling jokes, reading aloud, playing Twenty Questions, etc.). This interaction should begin in an environment where the child is already used to speaking comfortably.

2. Once the child is speaking consistently in the comfortable setting, the interaction should slowly move to a new environment. Each step should be slow, and the adult should wait for the child's anxiety to increase and then decrease before more movement is attempted. For instance, while playing a speaking game like HeadbanzTM or a fun speaking app on the phone, the adult might first open the office door, then move toward the doorway, slowly out in the hall, and finally walk down the hall. It is important to maintain speech throughout the movements; if speech is lost, the adult should cue the child to move back to the location where they were last speaking comfortably, prompt again for speech using a game or activity, and then move forward more slowly.

Ifyour child questions why the activity is moving to a new environment, games that require movement can be helpful in transitioning the activity to a new environment in a more natural way such as a bean bag toss, I Spy, etc.


Tool #4 - Shaping

Helping the child with SM take small steps toward speech

Stimulus fading (Tool #3) is considered the go-to intervention for children with SM because it is often successful. However, for some children it is not possible to use stimulus fading in the beginning of the intervention. The child may completely shut down near a new communication partner, or parents/caregivers may not be able to attend school to help with stimulus fading exercises. Peers may be hard to possible steps in shaping fade in due to young age and inability to follow directions. In these cases, shaping might be a better tool to try.

Where stimulus fading is taking pre-existing speech to a new environment and with new people, shaping is taking small but mighty steps to increase speech complexity while keeping all other factors (environment and audience) the same, beginning at the child's current ability level. Some children may be able to consistently use gestures to convey information; if so, that should be the beginning point. Others may be able to make sounds but not speak; if so, that should be the beginning point. Many children enjoy beginning with blowing air, as this is fun, interesting, and seems to have very little (in their mind) to do with speaking. As the child becomes more confident with one step, a new step can be added and practiced. Once the child becomes verbal consistently, the goals can increase to not only encouraging more/longer speech, but to taking this new speech and switching to stimulus fading (tool #3) to add in more conversational partners and environments.

There are countless ways to help shape speech. You will find ideas and activities on the next page to get started. This is not an exhaustive list; be creative! Also,don't be afraid to add small steps between the examples below if the child seems  to struggle. 

The journey of a thousand miles begins with one step.

-Lao Tzu
HELPFUL HANDOUT

A Step-Wise Approach to Confident Conversation: This sheet provides the posible steps in shaping speech, as well as fun ideas for prompting each specific step. Parents are encouraged to think of their child's specific interests and developmental level when deciding where to start and which activities to attempt.

This is available as a blank worksheet at the end of the chapter.

A Step-Wise Approach to Confident Conversation
Shaping Speech


12

Starting & maintaining conversations

Scripted →> prompted →> spontaneous speech, socials stories and social skills books (e.g. Jed Baker books), role playing (starting, maintaining, exiting social interactions), professional interview practice

11. Initiating Speech

20 questions, knock knock jokes, telling a story or acting out a story, person bingo, inter- views (child →> you, you →> child), requesting help, Show & TellTM game, Puppet PalsTM App, HeadbanzTMM, requesting help, take turns asking questions, ToontasticTM starter cards, Heads UpTM app

10 Speaking multiple word responses & longer utterances

Telephone game, reading, songs, TV jingles, "Tell me about...", role playing, "What's Wrong" pictures, finish the story, barrier games, carrier phrases, sequencing stories

9 Speaking one word responses (e.g. answering forced choice questions) 
Board games, making choices, fill in the blank, complete the sentence, SparklefishTM app, Super DuperTM Go Fish!TM, HangmanTM, Old MaidTM, BattleshipTM, Smarty EarsTM app, hot/cold game, making app, choices in play, what's missing games, UnoTM, counting tasks, AkinatorTM

8. Combining sounds to make words

 Shaping discrete sounds into sound combinations to make words, begin with Yes/No: Y+ES = Yes, N+O = No, other examples: H+I = Hi, M+E = Me, R+E+D Red, GR+E+N = Green

Making voiced sounds and/or animal & environmental sounds
 Making animal sounds in response to a picture of an animal, making letter sounds from flash cards, making first sounds from UnoTM cards, tongue clicking 

6. Making voiceless sounds (s, t, p, k, h, f, sh, ch, voiceless th)

Snake sound, cotton-ball races with sounds, flat tire sound, pinwheel with sounds, identifying sounds in magnetic letters

5 Blowing air

Cotton-ball races, bubbles, balloons, pinwheels, straw painting, blowing tissues, Free CandleTM app, Bubblegum HeroTM app

4 Making faces without the use of the mouth

Mirrored faces, silly faces, feeling faces, oral-motor exercises, Funny FacesTM game

3 Making noise without the use of the mouth
Clapping, stomping, snapping, musical instruments that do not require the mouth (e.g. drums, tambourine, cymbals, etc.), rain sound, tapping foot to the music

2 Using gestures (writing, pointing, nodding/shaking head, shrugging shoulders, etc.) 2 Charades, songs with hand movements (e.g. Itsy Bitsy Spider), thumbs up/thumbs down, practice giving and taking things from NCPs, Where's WaldoTM books, I spy, picture exchange cards, yes/no questions, Kids on StageTM, interview game (with yes/no questions), Pictureka TM, making choices 

Following directions of a new communication partner (NCP)

Simon Says, arts & crafts, board games, cooking, attaching a direction to a high-likelihood activity, dot- to-dot, barrier activities, classroom helper, red light/green light, scavenger hunts, sorting tasks


Tool #5 - Medication as an Intervention

Child & Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS)

Placebo Alone 

Zoloft Alone

CBT Alone

CBT & Zoloft

23%

60%

55%

81%

Percentage of children making positive & notable improvements The National Institute of Mental Health Study of separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social phobia in 488 children with an average age of 10 to 11 years. The study compared cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) alone, medication alone, placebo, and combined medication and CBT.

NO DIFFERENCE in overall rates of side effects among groups - SSRIS were deemed safe. 

>80% of responders maintained gains at 34-36 weeks


Medication can be a very helpful tool in the treatment of selective mutism. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors, or SSRIs, are the most commonly used medical interventions for SM due to their success and research basis in treating other anxiety and mood disorders. The most commonly used and studied medications for treating SM are Sertraline (Zoloft) and Fluoxetine (Prozac), likely because of their historic use in treating social phobia and the low occurrence of negative side effects in children (Barterian, et al., 2018).

Medication is best used in addition to appropriate behavioral treatment. Consider the scenario of learning to swim. Children are not born knowing how to swim, so parents provide life jackets. However, it is not long before the life jacket becomes constricting (it rescues and accommodates!) — it doesn't allow children the independence to learn how to swim. Thus, parents switch at some point to water wings or some other method of flotation support to help keep their children afloat (but not hinder learning) as they begin to swim. 

Medication is often used in a similar manner - it supports children, keeps them “afloat," and reduces some of the struggle in order for them to focus on brave work and building brave muscles. Eventually, we hope that we can reduce or remove medication after the child has built brave muscles and sufficiently practiced the brave work. Many experts in the field of SM highlight that this period of time on medication is likely more than a year since it can take several months to get to a correct, sufficient, maximized dose of medication followed by time for the child to practice brave work and build up self-confidence.

A large, multi-site research study called the Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS) compared the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy, Zoloft, and the combination of both against a placebo for the treatment of anxiety in children and adolescents. According to the CAMS study (Compton, et al., 2010), 81% of children made positive and notable improvements when receiving cognitive behavioral therapy and Zoloft, whereas only 60% made gains with CBT alone and 55% with Zoloft alone. The study was conducted on children with an average age of 10 to 11 diagnosed with a wide range of anxiety disorders including social phobia. 

This data suggests that approximately 60% of kids with anxiety benefit from cognitive behavioral therapy alone. That is an encouraging statistic and it means that many kids may not need to take medicine to make progress. Cognitive behavioral therapy is not recommended for children until approximately age 6 to 9 because they do not have the cognitive skills necessary to participate (e.g., awareness of their own thoughtss, perceptions, and internal world). For young children with selective mutism, exposure-based behavioral therapy is the gold standard. When children are not demonstrating significant progress through exposure-based therapy, parents and clinicians must determine if medication might be helpful. It can be controversial to put young children on medication and some parents are strictly opposed to doing so. Many parents carefully weigh the pros and cons to make a decision. Doctors will typically begin considering medicine based on the following criteria: 

Children who have had a poor response to behavioral therapy (see Parent Pointer)
Selective mutism symptoms are moderate to severe (significantly impairing the child's functioning)
A family history of an anxiety disorder or SM
Children with coexisting psychiatric problems such as social anxiety disorder, separation anxiety, or generalized anxiety disorder.



If you feel as though medication might be right for your child, consider experienced with treating the following:

Some primary care physicians and pediatricians are willing to prescribe SSRI medication to treat SM, while others prefer to refer out to psychiatrists (physicians with expertise in the pharmacological treatment of mental health issues).

SSRIs are typically prescribed at a low dose initially, and then increased slowly, with the physician keeping a close eye on side effects and effectiveness.

Because it takes several weeks for the medication to build up in the body, no or only minimal changes may be seen for the first few weeks. Around approximately two weeks, many families report some minor changes occurring, and maximal changes on that dose will be seen in approximately four weeks.
Depending the physician may increase the dose to help support maximal changes.




on the outcome of the low dose that was first administered, 

PARENT POINTER

Determining when medication is appropriate for your child may be a difficult consideration for both you and your child's physician. Physicians generally follow a set of guidelines/criteria when considering medication; however, some of the criteria are subjective. It may be difficult to know at what point behavioral therapy is not working effectively, or whether your child falls into the category of "more severely impaired." They will rely on your reporting and perhaps the suggestion of your child's therapist. As a parent, you might consider the quality of treatment that your child received (e.g, was the therapist informed and experienced with treating SM?), how your child responded to treatment, and what other options are available to help your child make progress (e.g., Is it feasible to work with a SM expert?).





PARENT POINTER

If you feel like you are "spinning your wheels" with no progress, it might be time to consult with a physician and review your child's history to determine if it's the right time to try medication.

PARENT POINTER

Other alternative pharmaceutical and homeopathic treatments considered by parents may include essential oils, CBD oil, diet changes, and acupuncture; however, these interventions have not been fully evaluated for effectiveness and safety in children and should be considered with care in conjunction with consultation from your child's pediatrician.

Common concerns regarding medication:

1. What will the side effects be? A few research studies specifically focus on the use of Prozac in young children with SM. These studies indicate that Prozac was well-tolerated and safe for children over the course of approximately six months of treatment (Dummit et. al., 1996). The most common side effects noted for this population are general physical complaints for the first few days (such as fatigue and upset stomach), though these typically go away as the child's body gets used to the medication. Additionally, some children can experience a significant disinhibiting (or agitation) effect, where they become very active, irritable, and have a hard time sleeping. Again, this typically only lasts for a few days, but should be reported to the prescribing physician if it occurs.

2. Will my child become addicted? Will they always have to use medication? These are two very different questions, but are often asked together. SSRIs are not addictive so there is no risk of a child (or adult) becoming addicted to them. It is impossible to estimate how long a child will need to take medication. Some children can take the medication for one year, receive excellent therapy and treatment, and begin to wean off the medication successfully. Other children will need medication long-term to help control anxiety. It is always the decision of the parent whether to begin and continue treatment with medication; you are not committing your child to a life of medication use by attempting a trial of medication now.

3. They are just fine at home, so why should I medicate them for something that doesn't happen all of the time? Many parents feel that if the child only struggles at school and in public, this doesn't constitute enough of a reason to use medication. However, parents must remember that important responsibilities and opportunities in a child's life occur in the school and in extracurricular or social settings. Without every opportunity to be successful in these areas, a child may fall behind in school, have difficulty developing and maintaining friendships, and become less confident. Some anecdotal evidence suggests that kids who are untreated or not adequately  treated may develop depression or other anxiety disorders, and might self-medicate in the future.

4. Will this make them suicidal? Many parents have heard of the "black box warning," or the labeled warning on SSRI boxes following a public report by the FDA about the increased risk of suicidal thoughts in teens with depression who were taking SSRIs. It is important to note that this warning refers to teens with depression (not anxiety) and the research study on which the black box warning was based found only some increase in thoughts of suicide, not actual attempts. This effect has not been reported in anxious children, including those with SM (Food and Drug Administration, 2016).

How will I use these tools in "real life"?

It's time to grab your imaginary backpack filled with all of our tools for overcoming selective within the school and in the community. We ask that mutism as we journey on to illustrate ways in which these tools can be used successfully and flexibly you "carry" (or understand) all of these tools so that if you need them, you will have them. Every child will respond differently to intervention, so utilizing tools that match the needs of your child is paramount. Keep in mind, too, that while one tool may work well in the beginning, you may need to shift and use a different tool to keep progressing along the pathway toward confident conversation.

