Chapter Three
THE SELECTIVE MUTISM JOURNEY


While trying to help my daughter, Anna, overcome selective mutism, I started to think of SM as a journey and I imagined myself hiking up a mountain. From first noticing the subtle (and the not-so-subtle) differences between Anna and her peers, to seeking a diagnosis and finding the right resources to help treat her, to participating in therapy, selective mutism felt consuming. Along with enough time and energy, I needed a good map, quality resources/tools, and the right guide to help me find the appropriate path forward.

Dr. Kotrba and I hope you will find practical tools and resources within the field guide to make your journey feel a little less overwhelming. We want you to have easily accessible resources for the situations we know are challenging as a caregiver, educator, and/or clinician. We want you to be able to create a map to guide you on your SM journey and help you to feel more confident in your direction. Ultimately, we hope this book provides the motivation you need to begin.

Before any great journey, it is essential to be prepared; to be knowledgeable about the journey ahead and ready to handle the pitfalls that are likely to emerge. One way to prepare is to heed the advice of others who have taken this journey before. With that in mind, please read through these important lessons learned by those who have navigated a similar path. The advice below was compiled with input from other parents of children with selective mutism, educators, and clinicians. When you feel lost in your journey (which will undoubtedly happen), please take a deep breath, find something funny to laugh at, relax, and re-read these points!

Prepare for Your Journey

1. Put on your oxygen mask before helping others:

Simplify and DO NOT feel guilty! Raising any child requires energy, patience and love. Raising a child with special emotional, developmental or physical needs can seem especially consuming. The additional energy, patience, love and focus required is often underestimated and, as parents, we tend to discount how quickly these extra efforts add up. We often overschedule without setting aside time to recharge and, in turn, we feel drained and exhausted.

Give yourself permission to slow down and simplify your life. Do not feel guilty for prioritizing your family.
Tell yourself, "I'm not going to organize my closet this month/year. Maybe next month/year I'll have more time for that."

Don't fear saying no! "I won't be able to help with the fundraising auction s year. Maybe next year or perhaps in the Spring I'll have more time." 
Avoid taking on additional work projects (if that is an option for you).

PARENT Pointer

Some children with selective mutism may present as challenging, strong willed, or even oppositional. See Chapter 9 for more information and helpful tips to help manage challenging behaviors.

2. Have a plan:

Stay focused and organized to assist your child in reaching their goals. We've all heard the mantra, "Failing to plan is planning to fail." As much as we would like to pretend that isn't true, we know it makes sense and that having a plan will ultimately help us to reach our goals. In this book we will provide insight, knowledge and tools that will assist you in planning, organizing and taking action. Of course, life doesn't always go according to plan, it's okay to attend to other pressing matters or take a brief break but return to your plan as soon as you are able.

3. The early bird gets the worm:

The earlier SM is recognized, addressed and treated, the better! Growing evidence suggests that, in general, helping a 6-year-old with SM is easier than treating a 14-year-old. If your child is older, please understand that treatment may be harder, but it is certainly not impossible.

 SM is not as difficult to treat as it was once believed to be. With early intervention and practice, we should expect to help our children move beyond silence.

If progress seems impossible, don't be afraid to try any and all tools in the arsenal, including medication.

4. Be consistent:

Gain perspective and a better understanding of your child's behavior and motivations, and then adjust your expectations of, and your reactions to, their behavior. We need to better determine when to be firm and when to be a little more relaxed. It is helpful to view our children's behaviors (especially those that we deem as negative) as actions not meant to be vindictive, bad or hurtful. We should always assume that our child is a good kid making an unhelpful choice (and potentially an uncontrollable choice) and communicate with them in this manner. They should know that we love them, we believe in them, and that they are AMAZING before we can discuss their behavior. Even when we assume their behavior is due to stress and/or anxiety, it's critical we provide consistent and relevant consequences balanced with empathy. Inconsistent consequences are especially confusing for kids and may, in fact, be anxiety- provoking. We must teach our children that it is acceptable to feel anxious, mad, sad, or angry but it is not acceptable to hit, kick, scream, or throw as a result. From an early age, consequences should be expected.

5. Expect forward momentum:

Imagine that we are hiking up a steep mountain. Suddenly, the weather gets bad and we must stop halfway. At first, we are grateful for the rest and feeling somewhat better. But after several days, we are getting antsy. We've cut into our rations, our climbing muscles are weakening, we are cold and wet, and we are beginning to fear for the future. Stagnating may keep us from ever reaching the top. The same is true of the SM journey. If we stop moving forward, we are not just standing still but rather sliding back. Kids begin to forget how to push past the feeling of discomfort. Therefore, if you feel you have hit a plateau, DO NOT STAY STUCK. Plan small yet consistent steps forward at all times because "brave muscles" must be stretched, flexed, and consistently worked for them to be ready for action when the time comes.
EXPECT consistent, even if slow, improvement. (Keep in mind, this doesn't mean there won't be an occasional setback along the way.) 
Many clinicians, if they don't have experience with SM, will not understand is not) that our kids can and will make progress (SLOW is ok, but NO progress is not)

Kids with SM need to get comfortable with their feelings of unease and anxiety. The more opportunities they have to push through their fear, the more likely they will learn how to cope. If they stay in their comfort zone and aren't pushed to continue progressing, they are not able to capitalize on forward momentum.

6. Heads or tails:

Avoid the headwinds and take advantage of tailwinds! We all know that when our children are sick, hungry, and/or tired it is difficult for them to focus. Additionally, some children become quite cranky and more likely to meltdown. This is not the time to push our children to take on new challenges. Timing is everything! Avoid almost certain failure by timing your requests appropriately.

Do not push for new accomplishments during times of unexpected or profound life change. Expect that progress might even slow down. 

After a taxing playdate, it might be best to avoid more practice at the grocery store.

When children are sick and feeling miserable, give them a break!

Just because our children are making progress and are more able to participate in social situations does not mean that it's easy for them to do so. In addition, being able to speak easily with one person does not make it easy for them to speak to all people. Our children may come home from school exhausted from their efforts. They will likely be more "taxed" than a child who does not have SM or social anxiety. They may need extra time to relax and unwind before we put additional demands on them, especially in the beginning. It is okay to give them the time and space they need to recharge. 

7. Communication is important:

It is so important to communicate effectively with our children (Chapter 4 provides additional guidance). They are likely aware of their trouble speaking,

PARENT PointER

The developing brain is "plastic" (it grows) and changes quite dramatically with age and experience during the elementary, middle and high school years. As a teacher, I (Shari) always reminded my students, "Don't give up today because tomorrow may be the day that your brain catches up. You may not understand or feel capable today, but with time and practice anything is possible. “
Discussing this topic with older kids is especially important because it can be quite motivating for them to realize that even biologically, our brain grows and changes over time; what seems so hard today may not always feel so hard.



8.

but they probably have no idea what to do about it. Our role is to observe without judging and to help them make sense of what's happening. We can help children to realize that everyone has challenges and that is what makes us all unique. Knowing when and how to start the conversation can be difficult. Use the conversation starters below to help:

"That seemed hard. Do you want to talk about it?"

"You seemed a little uncomfortable when the waiter asked what you wanted."

"Your teacher tells me that you have a hard time answering her questions."

Good follow-up questions might be:

"How does that make you feel?"

"Do want to tell me more about that?"

"Why do you think...?"

8. One size does not fit all:


Every child will require a different path forward. The journey will be different for each and every child and family. It is important to understand that while each child may exhibit a reluctance to speak, the cause for their anxiety and the in which they respond to treatment are likely to be very different. It is not only important for parents to understand this distinction but also for therapists, teachers, and anyone who may have first-hand knowledge of another child with SM. It is easy to fall into the trap of believing that because Nancy had SM and she "grew out of it" by the fourth grade, Joe will also just "grow out of it." As an outsider, we have no idea what kind of help Nancy had to "grow out of it" or whether she had any co-existing factors playing into her diagnosis. Overcoming Selective Mutism: The Parent's Field Guide is intended for caregivers, therapists, and school personnel who are motivated to create a relevant path forward, taking into consideration all aspects of the child's strengths and weaknesses as well as any external factors that might come into play.

9. The balancing act:

It's much easier to balance on a beam than it is to balance on a tight rope! Raising children is a balancing act. While most parents are balancing on a beam and struggling from time to time to stay on top, parents of children with special needs (SM included) can feel as if we are balancing on a tight rope. We did not sign up for the tight rope walk, but nevertheless we are raising children and making choices that will cause us to lean and teeter on the edge. We may correct our posture only to find ourselves re-balancing again a few moments, days, or even years later. It's difficult to feel secure in our decisions.

I, Shari, find it helpful to remember that we are just as capable as the parent down the street who seems to be raising a social "all-star." Our efforts and our child's successes may go unnoticed now, but when they become confident and secure adults, contributing in the best way that they are able, we will be just as proud! My husband always jokes, "I'm a second-half player." Coming in off the bench provides just as much of an opportunity to make an impact and to succeed. It isn't where our children start, but where they end up!

10. You are your child's champion:

You are your child's best advocate! Don't be afraid to ask for and make changes!

Although well intentioned, doctors, psychologists, teachers, and administrators (your team) are not always right. It's best to frequently and openly discuss any concerns you have in an effort to help your child receive the support they need.

In school and in the community, you must be your child's advocate and that may require a few uncomfortable requests or conversations. Take deep breaths, seek input from others, prepare your thoughts and words carefully, and then make your intentions clear while remaining respectful. Your child comes first and, at times, that may upset the apple cart, but if you approach the situation carefully and with respect, your request is more likely to be followed through.

Caregivers, remember that the intervention team will be working with you and they want your child to succeed, too. The more information and resources you can provide, the more likely they are to listen. There are many great handouts and resources within this book!

If you are at the beginning of your journey, struggling along the way, or even confident in your direction, we hope you will continue your journey using The Parent's Field Guide to:
Simplify the process for helping children overcome SM 
Feel empowered and confident in setting your path forward 
Learn proven tools and strategies to help your child make progress on their journey to overcome SM
Understand that it's about so much more than simply getting kids to speak 


PARENT POINTER

Remember that your child may also feel like they are navigating the world on 
a tightrope rather than a beam! Most children will experience struggles and they may feel as though their life is a balancing act, but children with SM will likely feel this more acutely. It's important to recognize this tendency and to support them when we notice them starting to falter.


PARENT POINTER

Reminder: We don't live in a world of "should." The teacher should know about SM. The
school counselor should help your child. My child should talk to others without all these steps. Should will not get us where we want to be. We must be proactive. If your child isn't being optimally "served" even after your best efforts to inform others about SM, you may need to find new allies and make new plans.


Introducing "The Field Map TM"

We created The Field Map as a visual representation of the SM journey including the elements we feel are fundamental to helping children find their voice. This map will provide an overview of the journey to come. On the following pages, you will become acquainted with the appearance and the concepts represented on The Field Map and how you might use the map to devise a plan for your child. As the book progresses, we will slowly provide more detail about each element and its importance in overcoming SM. Chapters 5 and 7 will provide several handouts and worksheets to help you plan your child's journey in a way that is motivating, fun, and engaging for you and your child.


The Mountains (Domains): Peers Peak, School Summit, Community Crest

Overarching challenges that children with selective mutism face in speaking to peers, speaking at school, and speaking with community members. To reach the top of these peaks might require conquering several challenge pathways.

Challenge Pathway

A planned, step-wise, and structured approach to conquering challenges. Challenge pathways provide the small steps needed to move your child from their current level of engagement to comfortable speech. Determining which intermediate steps will assist a child to reach a particular goal or milestone is truly the key to overcoming selective mutism. Challenge pathways should be planned with careful thought and consideration of the child's current abilities and challenges.

Foundational Foothills

A solid foundation is paramount for the successful intervention/treatment of selective mutism. Educate and prepare yourself, your child and your family. Build and educate a team of "helpers" (school, therapist, family, community, etc.).


Mount Mindful

Key skills that do not directly address a child's inability to speak but skills that if mastered, may be beneficial in helping to change the child's mindset - helping them to be more aware of their thoughts and how those thoughts may impact their actions.

 The problem with perfection

The importance of sticking with challenges (grit) 
The more you do, the more you can do

Recognizing and managing discomfort

Victory Valley

Victory Valley represents accomplishment over fear, strength in facing discomfort, the conquering of challenges, and bravery in taking small steps toward larger "victories". Achievements should be celebrated!

PARENT POINTER

You may find that some steps and examples are integral to helping your child, while other advice may seem foreign and unnecessary. That is to be expected! You and your child's journey will be different than those taken by other families of children with SM, but you are not alone.




The Mountains (Domanins) 
Overarching challenges facing children with SM

Generally speaking, there are three main overarching challenges facing children with SM-speaking with peers, speaking in the community, and speaking 
at school. On The Field Map, you'll notice that we prominently display three mountains, Peers Peak, Community Crest, and School Summit (corresponding to those may seem foreign and main challenges). If you think about your child's abilities/challenges in this context as you read through the rest of the book, you can begin to think in terms of where the "work" might begin. We will refer to these three overarching challenges as "domains."




PARENT PINTER

Throughout the book, we highlight several challenge pathways. Notice that each pathway begins with the easiest step at the bottom and progresses toward the top with the final most challenging step.


Challenge Pathway

A planned step-wise approach to conquering challenges

In order to overcome any type of fear or anxiety, an individual must face that fear in small steps. Facing fears in small steps allows for a slow decrease in anxiety, as well as increased confidence and feelings of accomplishment. In other texts, these slow steps toward facing fears are referred to as a "fear hierarchy." We chose to refer to them as challenge pathways because they illustrate specific, planned steps on a path to overcoming challenges (big and small). The more often children take pathways that truly challenge them, the more likely they are to forge a path toward overcoming selective mutism.

Learning To Drive

Challenge Pathway Example

Driving on the road independently.

5

Driving on the road with a parent in the car supervising.

4

Driving on the road with a parent in the car providing instructions.

3

Driving in an empty parking lot with a parent in the car.

2

Learning the parts of a car and the steps for driving. 1


Giving and Taking From Unknown Adults
Challenge Pathway Example

Placing money directly into the clerk's hand and accepting change back in hand.

4

placed on the counter. Placing money directly into the clerk's hand, and accepting change that is

3

Holding cash out for the clerk to take.

2

Placing money on the counter for the clerk to pick up. 1


Pathway Hazards

Factors impacting the difficulty of the challenge and the child's ability to conquer it

Pathway Hazards are factors which may affect your child's ability to reach a given goal, whether it be with peers, in the community or at school. There are three main categories for Pathway Hazards - the audience, the environment, and the speech demand involved in the challenge.

—

The Audience How many people are there? Are they particularly difficult to speak with? Might they be contaminated? Is there a perceived audience for speech? Does my child do better with or without a parent in the room? Are men vs. women easier? Peers vs. adults?

The Environment - Is this a place where the child is used to speaking or used to not speaking? Is it a new environment? Is it chaotic or quiet? Is the environment associated with a significant speech expectation? Is there anything about the environment that might make it challenging for the child to speak?

The Speech Demand - Is the child being asked to respond (typically easier) or initiate (typically harder)? How lengthy of a response is expected or needed to answer the question? Is the response scripted (e.g., using forced-choice questions, reading, or a game with very defined responses like "Go Fish")? Does the child understand the question? Is it an easy, concrete question or a more abstract one (e.g., naming would be concrete and easy, while questions requesting opinions on topics are more abstract and may be harder)?

PARENT POINTEER

Children may be hesitant to respond to a question if they believe additional questions or a conversation may follow.


PARENT PoINTER

Be patient if this information does not seem clear just yet. The ideas introduced on The Field Map will be further explored in the chapters to come. The framework of The Field Map is provided here to set the stage and to give you an overall picture of the process as you move through the rest of the book to plan your family's journey.

When considering which challenge your child may be ready to take on, think about the Pathway Hazards as they might be helpful in determining the appropriate order of steps to reach important goals. Children with SM can be very sensitive to environmental and situational factors; a small shift or change in these factors may change the outcome of a child's progress along a challenge pathway.

Foundational Foothills

Setting the foundation for your intervention

Before you embark on any great journey, you must make sure the foundation is exploring specific intervention methods. Establishing a foundation includes solid. We take great care to make sure you are informed and prepared before educating and preparing your child and family for the intervention, as well as building and educating your intervention team (school, therapist, family, etc.).

Mount Mindful

Important life skills that may benefit children with SM

Further off in the distance, you'll notice Mount Mindful. Despite its placement in the background, Mount Mindful provides important insight into key skills that are significant for all children (and especially those with SM). These are not necessarily skills that will directly address your child's inability to speak, but they are skills that may change the way in which they perceive their own anxiety and the struggles they face as they move forward toward overcoming their challenges. There is no perfect time to begin introducing these concepts to children. We suggest you take any and all opportunities to teach these important lessons:

The problem with perfection: Children with SM often fear being imperfect (which may garner more attention and perhaps ridicule). They may go to great lengths to avoid being perceived as imperfect. By demonstrating our own comfort with making mistakes-perhaps even purposefully making mistakes ourselves we model how mistakes are expected, are a part of human nature, and how they can be a learning experience. We discuss ways to address the perfection problem in Chapter 9.

The importance of sticking with challenges (grit): Not giving up during times of stress and anxiety is an incredibly important characteristic and it is a skill that can be learned and practiced. In recent years, grit has been touted as one of the key indicators for success in life. For more on grit, see Chapter 4.

The more you do, the more you can do: Forward momentum through small, but courageous, steps will add to a child's sense of bravery and success. It is easy to become frustrated with slow movement on challenge pathways; however, celebrating even small accomplishments can help propel children forward. One way that parents can encourage forward momentum is through reward systems, which we review in Chapter 4.

Recognizing and managing discomfort: A key step in facing fear is realizing that the signal is discomfort, NOT danger. Being brave and courageous includes doing what is important despite the discomfort. Thus, it is important to encourage kids to predict discomfort, understand that it is a false alarm, and move forward toward the goal they set out to achieve. In other words, we hope children learn how to be comfortable being uncomfortable!

The Backpack "Tools"

Strategies to promote speech

Don't forget the backpack! It has all the "tools" you will need to successfully navigate challenge pathways. These evidence-based techniques and interventions are researched and proven to help children overcome selective mutism. In Chapter 5, you will learn more about each of the tools represented in the backpack including Rapport Building, Verbal Prompting, Stimulus Fading, Shaping, and Medical Intervention.

Victory Valley

Along the way, there will be many challenges but there will also be many victories some small and some mighty! It can be very motivating for children to see how far they have come. This part of the field map was designed for “bragging rights. You can use stickers, markers, crayons, etc. to commemorate accomplishment over fear, challenge pathways conquered, and other examples of bravery as your child takes small steps toward larger victories! Chapter 4 will provide more information on Victory Valley as well as a handout that you and/or your child may use to keep track of accomplishments..
